PART I

Item 1. Business

Introduction

Goldman Sachs is a leading global financial institution that delivers a broad
range of financial services across investment banking, securities, investment
management and consumer banking to a large and diversified client base that
includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals.
Our purpose is to advance sustainable economic growth and financial
opportunity. Our goal, reflected in our

One Goldman Sachs

initiative, is to deliver the full range of our services and expertise to
support our clients in a more accessible, comprehensive and efficient manner,
across businesses and product areas.

When we use the terms “Goldman Sachs,” “we,” “us” and “our,” we mean The
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (Group Inc. or parent company), a Delaware
corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries. When we use the term “our
subsidiaries,” we mean the consolidated subsidiaries of Group Inc. References
to “this

Form 10-K”

are to our Annual Report on

Form 10-K

for the year ended December 31, 2021. All references to 2021, 2020 and 2019
refer to our years ended, or the dates, as the context requires, December 31,
2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.

Group Inc. is a bank holding company (BHC) and a financial holding company
(FHC) regulated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB).
Our U.S. depository institution subsidiary, Goldman Sachs Bank USA (GS Bank
USA), is a New York State-chartered bank.

Our Business Segments

We report our activities in four business segments: Investment Banking, Global
Markets, Asset Management, and Consumer & Wealth Management. Investment
Banking generates revenues from financial advisory, underwriting and corporate
lending activities. Global Markets consists of Fixed Income, Currency and
Commodities (FICC) and Equities, and generates revenues from intermediation
and financing activities. Asset Management generates revenues from management
and other fees, incentive fees, equity investments, and lending and debt
investments. Consumer & Wealth Management consists of Wealth management and
Consumer banking, and generates revenues from management and other fees,
incentive fees, private banking and lending, and consumer-oriented activities.

The chart below presents our four business segments and their revenue sources.

Investment Banking

Investment Banking serves public and private sector clients around the world.
We provide financial advisory services, help companies raise capital to
strengthen and grow their businesses and provide financing to corporate
clients. We seek to develop and maintain long-term relationships with a
diverse global group of institutional clients, including corporations,
governments, states and municipalities. Our goal is to deliver to our
institutional clients all of our resources in a seamless fashion, with
investment banking serving as the main initial point of contact.

Investment Banking generates revenues from the following:

Financial advisory.

We have been a leader for many years in providing financial advisory services,
including strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and
acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings and
spin-offs. In particular, we help clients execute large, complex transactions
for which we provide multiple services, including cross-border structuring
expertise. We also assist our clients in managing their asset and liability
exposures and their capital.  

Underwriting.

We help companies raise capital to fund their businesses. As a financial
intermediary, our job is to match the capital of our investing clients, who
aim to grow the savings of millions of people, with the needs of our public
and private sector clients, who need financing to generate growth, create jobs
and deliver products and services. Our underwriting activities include public
offerings and private placements, including local and cross-border
transactions and acquisition financing, of a wide range of securities and
other financial instruments, including loans. Underwriting consists of the
following:  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Equity underwriting

We underwrite common and preferred stock and convertible and exchangeable
securities. We regularly receive mandates for large, complex transactions and
have held a leading position in worldwide public common stock offerings and
worldwide initial public offerings for many years.

Debt underwriting

We underwrite and originate various types of debt instruments, including
investment-grade and high-yield debt, bank and bridge loans, including in
connection with acquisition financing, and emerging- and growth-market debt,
which may be issued by, among others, corporate, sovereign, municipal and
agency issuers. In addition, we underwrite and originate structured
securities, which include mortgage-related securities and other asset-backed
securities.

Corporate lending.

We lend to corporate clients, including through relationship lending, middle-
market lending and acquisition financing. The hedges related to this lending
and financing activity are reported as part of our corporate lending activity.  

We also provide transaction banking services, including to certain of our
corporate and financial institution clients. Transaction banking revenues
include net interest income attributed to transaction banking deposits.

Global Markets

Global Markets serves our clients who buy and sell financial products, raise
funding and manage risk. We do this by acting as a market maker and offering
market expertise on a global basis. Global Markets makes markets and
facilitates client transactions in fixed income, equity, currency and
commodity products. In addition, we make markets in, and clear client
transactions on, major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide.

As a market maker, we provide prices to clients globally across thousands of
products in all major asset classes and markets. At times, we take the other
side of transactions ourselves if a buyer or seller is not readily available,
and at other times we connect our clients to other parties who want to
transact. Our willingness to make markets, commit capital and take risk in a
broad range of products is crucial to our client relationships. Market makers
provide liquidity and play a critical role in price discovery, which
contributes to the overall efficiency of the capital markets. In connection
with our market-making activities, we maintain (i) market-making positions,
typically for a short period of time, in response to, or in anticipation of,
client demand, and (ii) positions to actively manage our risk exposures that
arise from these market-making activities (collectively, inventory).

Our clients are institutions that are primarily professional market
participants, including investment entities whose ultimate clients include
individual investors investing for their retirement, buying insurance or
saving surplus cash.

We execute a high volume of transactions for our clients in large, highly
liquid markets (such as markets for U.S. Treasury securities, stocks and
certain agency mortgage pass-through securities). We also execute transactions
for our clients in less liquid markets (such as

mid-cap

corporate bonds, emerging market currencies and certain

non-agency

mortgage-backed securities) for spreads and fees that are generally somewhat
larger than those charged in more liquid markets. Additionally, we structure
and execute transactions involving customized or tailor-made products that
address our clients’ risk exposures, investment objectives or other complex
needs (such as a jet fuel hedge for an airline), as well as derivative
transactions related to client advisory and underwriting activities.

Through our global sales force, we maintain relationships with our clients,
receiving orders and distributing investment research, trading ideas, market
information and analysis. Much of this connectivity between us and our clients
is maintained on technology platforms, including

Marquee

, and operates globally where markets are open for trading.

Marquee

provides institutional investors with market intelligence, risk analytics,
proprietary datasets and trade execution across multiple asset classes.

Global Markets and our other businesses are supported by our Global Investment
Research division, which, as of December 2021, provided fundamental research
on approximately 3,000 companies worldwide and approximately 50 national
economies, as well as on industries, currencies and commodities.

Global Markets activities are organized by asset class and include both “cash”
and “derivative” instruments. “Cash” refers to trading the underlying
instrument (such as a stock, bond or barrel of oil). “Derivative” refers to
instruments that derive their value from underlying asset prices, indices,
reference rates and other inputs, or a combination of these factors (such as
an option, which is the right or obligation to buy or sell a certain bond,
stock or other asset on a specified date in the future at a certain price, or
an interest rate swap, which is the agreement to convert a fixed rate of
interest into a floating rate or vice versa).

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Global Markets consists of FICC and Equities.

FICC.

FICC generates revenues from intermediation and financing activities.

FICC intermediation.

Includes client execution activities related to making markets in both cash
and derivative instruments, as detailed below.  

Interest Rate Products.

Government bonds (including inflation-linked securities) across maturities,
other government-backed securities, and interest rate swaps, options and other
derivatives.

Credit Products.

Investment-grade and high-yield corporate securities, credit derivatives,
exchange-traded funds (ETFs), bank and bridge loans, municipal securities,
emerging market and distressed debt, and trade claims.

Mortgages.

Commercial mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives, residential
mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives (including U.S. government
agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations and other securities and
loans), and other asset-backed securities, loans and derivatives.

Currencies.

Currency options, spot/forwards and other derivatives on

G-10

currencies and emerging-market products.

Commodities.

Commodity derivatives and, to a lesser extent, physical commodities, involving
crude oil and petroleum products, natural gas, agricultural, base, precious
and other metals, electricity, including renewable power, environmental
products and other commodity products.

FICC financing.

Includes providing financing to our clients through warehouse loans backed by
mortgages (including residential and commercial mortgage loans), corporate
loans and consumer loans (including auto loans and private student loans). We
also provide financing to clients through structured credit, asset-backed
lending, and through securities purchased under agreements to resell (resale
agreements).  

Equities.

Equities generates revenues from intermediation and financing activities.

Equities intermediation.

We make markets in equity securities and equity-related products, including
ETFs, convertible securities, options, futures and

over-the-counter

(OTC) derivative instruments. As a principal, we facilitate client
transactions by providing liquidity to our clients, including by transacting
in large blocks of stocks or derivatives, requiring the commitment of our
capital.  

We also structure and make markets in derivatives on indices, industry
sectors, financial measures and individual company stocks. We develop
strategies and provide information about portfolio hedging and restructuring
and asset allocation transactions for our clients. We also work with our
clients to create specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated
investors to establish or liquidate investment positions or undertake hedging
strategies. We are one of the leading participants in the trading and
development of equity derivative instruments.

Our exchange-based market-making activities include making markets in stocks
and ETFs, futures and options on major exchanges worldwide.

We generate commissions and fees from executing and clearing institutional
client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide,
as well as OTC transactions. We provide our clients with access to a broad
spectrum of equity execution services, including electronic

“low-touch”

access and more complex “high-touch” execution through both traditional and
electronic platforms, including

Marquee

Equities financing

Includes prime brokerage and other equities financing activities, including
securities lending, margin lending and swaps.  

We earn fees by providing clearing, settlement and custody services globally.
In addition, we provide our hedge fund and other clients with a technology
platform and reporting that enables them to monitor their security portfolios
and manage risk exposures.

We provide services that principally involve borrowing and lending securities
to cover institutional clients’ short sales and borrowing securities to cover
our short sales and to make deliveries into the market. In addition, we are an
active participant in

broker-to-broker

securities lending and third-party agency lending activities.

We provide financing to our clients for their securities trading activities
through margin loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or other
acceptable collateral. We earn a spread equal to the difference between the
amount we pay for funds and the amount we receive from our client.

We execute swap transactions to provide our clients with exposure to
securities and indices.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Asset Management

Asset Management provides investment services to help clients preserve and
grow their financial assets. We provide these services to our institutional
clients, as well as investors who primarily access our products through a
network of third-party distributors around the world.

We manage client assets across a broad range of investment strategies and
asset classes, including equity, fixed income and alternative investments.
Alternative investments primarily includes hedge funds, credit funds, private
equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
Our investment offerings include those managed on a fiduciary basis by our
portfolio managers, as well as those managed by third-party managers. We offer
our investment solutions in a variety of structures, including separately
managed accounts, mutual funds, private partnerships and other commingled
vehicles.

We also provide customized investment advisory solutions designed to address
our clients’ investment needs. These solutions begin with identifying clients’
objectives and continue through portfolio construction, ongoing asset
allocation and risk management and investment realization. We draw from a
variety of third-party managers, as well as our proprietary offerings, to
implement solutions for clients.

Asset Management generates revenues from the following:

Management and other fees.

The majority of revenues in management and other fees consists of asset-based
fees on client assets that we manage. The fees that we charge vary by asset
class, distribution channel and the types of services provided, and are
affected by investment performance, as well as asset inflows and redemptions.  

Incentive fees.

In certain circumstances, we also receive incentive fees based on a percentage
of a fund’s or a separately managed account’s return, or when the return
exceeds a specified benchmark or other performance targets. Such fees include
overrides, which consist of the increased share of the income and gains
derived primarily from our private equity and credit funds when the return on
a fund’s investments over the life of the fund exceeds certain threshold
returns.  

Equity investments.

Our alternative investing activities relate to public and private equity
investments in corporate, real estate and infrastructure entities. We also
make investments through consolidated investment entities, substantially all
of which are engaged in real estate investment activities.  

Lending and debt investments.

We invest in corporate debt and provide financing for real estate and other
assets. These activities include investments in mezzanine debt, senior debt
and distressed debt securities.  

Consumer & Wealth Management

Consumer & Wealth Management helps clients achieve their individual financial
goals by providing a broad range of wealth advisory and banking services,
including financial planning, investment management, deposit-taking and
lending. Services are offered through our global network of advisors and via
our digital platforms.

Wealth Management.

Wealth management

provides tailored wealth advisory services to clients across the wealth
spectrum. We operate globally serving individuals, families, family offices,
and foundations and endowments. Our relationships are established directly or
introduced through corporations that sponsor financial wellness programs for
their employees.

We offer personalized financial planning inclusive of income and liability
management, compensation and benefits analysis, trust and estate structuring,
tax optimization, philanthropic giving, and asset protection. We also provide
customized investment advisory solutions, and offer structuring and execution
capabilities in security and derivative products across all major global
markets. We leverage a broad, open-architecture investment platform and our
global execution capabilities to help clients achieve their investment goals.
In addition, we offer clients a full range of private banking services,
including a variety of deposit alternatives and loans that our clients use to
finance investments in both financial and nonfinancial assets, bridge cash
flow timing gaps or provide liquidity and flexibility for other needs.

Wealth management generates revenues from the following:

Management and other fees.

Includes fees related to managing assets, providing investing and wealth
advisory solutions, providing financial planning and counseling services via
Ayco Personal Financial Management, and executing brokerage transactions for
wealth management clients.  

Incentive fees.

In certain circumstances, we also receive incentive fees from wealth
management clients based on a percentage of a fund’s return, or when the
return exceeds a specified benchmark or other performance targets. Such fees
include overrides, which consist of the increased share of the income and
gains derived primarily from our private equity and credit funds when the
return on a fund’s investments over the life of the fund exceeds certain
threshold returns.  

Private banking and lending.

Includes net interest income allocated to deposit-taking and net interest
income earned on lending activities for wealth management clients.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Consumer Banking.

Our Consumer banking business issues unsecured loans, through our digital
platform,

Marcus by Goldman Sachs

(Marcus),

and credit cards, to finance the purchases of goods or services. We also
accept deposits (including savings and time deposits) through Marcus, in GS
Bank USA and Goldman Sachs International Bank (GSIB). Additionally, we provide
investing services through

Marcus Invest

to U.S. customers.

Consumer banking revenues consist of net interest income earned on unsecured
loans issued to consumers through Marcus and credit card lending activities,
and net interest income attributed to consumer deposits.

Business Continuity and Information Security

Business continuity and information security, including cyber security, are
high priorities for us. Their importance has been highlighted by (i) the
coronavirus

(COVID-19)

pandemic and the work-from-home arrangements implemented by companies
worldwide in response, including us, (ii) numerous highly publicized events in
recent years, including cyber attacks against financial institutions,
governmental agencies, large consumer-based companies, software and
information technology service providers and other organizations, some of
which have resulted in the unauthorized access to or disclosure of personal
information and other sensitive or confidential information, the theft and
destruction of corporate information and requests for ransom payments, and
(iii) extreme weather events.

Our Business Continuity & Technology Resilience Program has been developed to
provide reasonable assurance of business continuity in the event of
disruptions at our critical facilities or of our systems, and to comply with
regulatory requirements, including those of FINRA. Because we are a BHC, our
Business Continuity & Technology Resilience Program is also subject to review
by the FRB. The key elements of the program are crisis management, business
continuity, technology resilience, business recovery, assurance and
verification, and process improvement. In the area of information security, we
have developed and implemented a framework of principles, policies and
technology designed to protect the information provided to us by our clients
and our own information from cyber attacks and other misappropriation,
corruption or loss. Safeguards are designed to maintain the confidentiality,
integrity and availability of information. For further information about the
Business Continuity Planning strategy we have implemented in response to the

COVID-19

pandemic, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations — Regulatory and Other Matters — Impact of

COVID-19

Pandemic” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K.

Human Capital Management

Our people are our greatest asset. We believe that a major strength and
principal reason for our success is the quality, dedication, determination and
collaboration of our people, which enables us to serve our clients, generate
long-term value for our shareholders and contribute to the broader community.
We invest heavily in developing and supporting our people throughout their
careers, and we strive to maintain a work environment that fosters
professionalism, excellence, high standards of business ethics, diversity,
teamwork and cooperation among our employees worldwide.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Diversity and Inclusion

The strength of our culture, our ability to execute our strategy, and our
relationships with clients all depend on a diverse workforce and an inclusive
work environment that encourages a wide range of perspectives. We believe that
diversity at all levels of our organization, from entry-level analysts to
senior management, as well as the Board of Directors of Group Inc. (Board),
which as of December 2021, was approximately 62% diverse by race, gender or
sexual orientation, is essential to our sustainability. Our management team
works closely with our Global Inclusion and Diversity Committee to continue to
increase diversity of our global workforce at all levels. In addition, we have
global and regional Inclusion and Diversity Committees which promote an
environment that values different perspectives, challenges conventional
thinking and maximizes the potential of all our people.

We believe that increased diversity, including diversity of experience, gender
identity, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, disability and veteran status,
in addition to being a social imperative, is vital to our commercial success
through the creativity that it fosters. For this reason, we have established a
comprehensive action plan with aspirational diversity hiring goals which are
set forth below and are focused on cultivating an inclusive environment for
all our colleagues.

Diverse leadership is crucial to our long-term success and to driving
innovation, and we have implemented and expanded outreach and career
advancement programs for rising diverse executive talent. For example, we are
focused on providing diverse vice presidents the necessary coaching,
sponsorship and advocacy to support their career trajectories and strengthen
their leadership platforms, including through programs, such as our Vice
President Career Investment Initiative focused on high-performing Black and
Hispanic/Latinx VPs in the Americas and EMEA. Many other career development
initiatives are aimed at fostering diverse talent at the analyst and associate
level, including the Black Analyst and Associate Initiative, the
Hispanic/Latinx Analyst Initiative and the Women’s Career Strategies
Initiative. We have also established Inclusion Networks and Interest Forums
that are open to all professionals at Goldman Sachs to promote and advance
connectivity, understanding, inclusion and diversity.

Progress Toward Aspirational Goals.

Reflecting our efforts to increase diversity, the composition of our most
recent partnership class was 27% women professionals, 17% Asian professionals,
7% Black professionals and 5% Hispanic/Latinx professionals. The composition
of our most recent managing director class was 30% women professionals, 28%
Asian professionals, 5% Black professionals and 5% Hispanic/Latinx
professionals.

We have also set forth the following aspirational goals:

We aim for analyst and associate hiring (which accounts for over 70% of our
annual hiring) to achieve representation of 50% women professionals, 11% Black
professionals and 14% Hispanic/Latinx professionals in the Americas, and 9%
Black professionals in the U.K. In 2021, our analyst and associate hires
included 45% women professionals, 11% Black professionals and 15%
Hispanic/Latinx professionals in the Americas, and 14% Black professionals in
the U.K.  

We aim for women professionals to represent 40% of our vice presidents
globally by 2025 and 30% of senior talent (vice presidents and above) in the
U.K. by 2023, while also endeavoring for women employees to comprise 50% of
all of our employees globally over time. As of December 2021, women
professionals represented 32% of our vice president population globally and
31% of senior talent (vice presidents and above) in the U.K., and women
employees represented 41% of all of our employees globally.  

We aim for Black professionals to represent 7% of our vice president
population in the Americas and in the U.K., and for Hispanic/Latinx
professionals to represent 9% of our vice president population in the
Americas, both by 2025. As of December 2021, Black professionals represented
4% of our vice president population in the Americas and 4% in the U.K., and
Hispanic/Latinx professionals represented 6% of our vice president population
in the Americas.  

We aim to double the number of campus hires in the U.S. recruited from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) by 2025 relative to 2020.  

The metrics above are based on self-identification.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Talent Development and Retention

We seek to help our people achieve their full potential by investing in them
and supporting a culture of continuous development. Our goals are to maximize
individual capabilities, increase commercial effectiveness and innovation,
reinforce our culture, expand professional opportunities, and help our people
contribute positively to their communities.

Instilling our culture in all employees is a continuous process, in which
training plays an important part. We offer our employees the opportunity to
participate in ongoing educational offerings and periodic seminars through
Goldman Sachs University. To accelerate their integration into the firm and
our culture, new hires have the opportunity to receive training before they
start working and orientation programs with an emphasis on culture and
networking, and nearly all employees participate in at least one training
event each year. For our more senior employees, we provide guidance and
training on how to manage people and projects effectively, exhibit strong
leadership and exemplify our culture. We are also focused on developing a high
performing, diverse leadership pipeline and career planning for our next
generation of leaders. We maintain a variety of programs aimed at employees’
professional growth and support throughout their careers and as they evolve
into leaders, including initiatives, such as our Vice President and Managing
Director Leadership Acceleration Initiatives.

Enhancing our people’s experience of internal mobility is a key focus, as we
believe that this will inspire employees, help retain top talent and create
diverse experiences to build future leaders.

Another important part of instilling our culture is our employee performance
review process. Employees are reviewed by supervisors,

co-workers

and employees whom they supervise in a

360-degree

review process that is integral to our team approach and includes an
evaluation of an employee’s performance with respect to risk management,
protecting our reputation, adherence to our code of conduct, compliance, and
diversity and inclusion principles. Our approach to evaluating employee
performance centers on providing robust, timely and actionable feedback that
facilitates professional development. We have directed our managers, as
leaders at the firm, to take an active coaching role with their teams. We have
also implemented “The Three Conversations at GS” through which managers
establish goals with their team members at the start of the year, check in

mid-year

on progress and then close out the year with a conversation on performance
against goals.

We believe that our people value opportunities to contribute to their
communities and that these opportunities enhance their job satisfaction. We
also believe that being able to volunteer together with colleagues and
participate in community organizations working on local service projects
strengthens our people’s bond with us. Community TeamWorks, our signature
volunteering initiative, enables our people to participate in high-impact,
team-based volunteer opportunities, including projects coordinated with
hundreds of nonprofit partner organizations worldwide. During 2021, our people
volunteered approximately 80,000 hours of service globally through Community
TeamWorks, with approximately 15,000 employees partnering with approximately
370 nonprofit organizations on approximately 800 community projects. To
respond to the interest of our people in helping with the response to the

COVID-19

pandemic, we have developed a series of opportunities to support vulnerable
populations remotely, including small business owners, students and the
elderly.

Wellness

We recognize that for our people to be successful in the workplace they need
support in their personal, as well as their professional lives. We have
created a strong support framework for wellness, which is intended to enable
employees to better balance their roles at work and their responsibilities at
home. In addition to providing 20 weeks of parental leave for all employees,
we provide other benefits to support the wellness of our employees, including
family care leave, bereavement leave and, for longer-tenured employees, an
unpaid sabbatical leave. We also continue to advance our resilience programs,
offering our people a range of counseling, coaching, medical advisory and
personal wellness services. We have increased the availability of these
resources during the

COVID-19

pandemic, and we have continued to evolve and strengthen virtual offerings
with the aim of maintaining the physical and mental well-being of our
employees, enhancing their effectiveness and cohesiveness and providing them
with greater opportunities to access support.

We also introduced a

COVID-19

10-day

family leave policy, available to our people globally to care for family
members due to

COVID-19

related illness or meet childcare needs, including homeschooling. We remain
focused on facilitating the safe return of our employees to our offices, as
circumstances permit, and employees in a number of our locations around the
world have returned to the office to varying degrees. Given that the situation
regarding the

COVID-19

pandemic varies geographically, our approach to transitioning back to the
office is tailored to each location, and it evolves based on the specific
conditions and requirements of each location. We have comprehensive protocols
in place, including regular testing, and we will continue to be guided by a
people-first approach as circumstances evolve.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

In addition, to support the financial wellness of our employees, we offer a
variety of resources that help them manage their personal financial health and
decision-making, including financial education series, live and

on-demand

webinars, articles and interactive digital tools.

Global Reach and Strategic Locations

As a firm with a global client base, we take a strategic approach to
attracting, developing and managing a global workforce. Our clients are
located worldwide and we are an active participant in financial markets around
the world. As of December 2021, we had headcount of 43,900, offices in over 35
countries and 52% of our headcount was based in the Americas, 18% in EMEA and
30% in Asia. Our employees come from over 180 countries and speak more than
110 languages as of December 2021.

In addition to maintaining offices in major financial centers around the
world, we have established key strategic locations, including in Bengaluru,
Salt Lake City, Dallas, Singapore and Warsaw. We continue to evaluate the
expanded use of strategic locations, including cities in which we do not
currently have a presence.

As of December 2021, 40% of our employees were working in one of these key
strategic locations. We believe our investment in these strategic locations
enables us to build centers of excellence around specific capabilities that
support our business initiatives.

Sustainability

We have a long-standing commitment to sustainability. Our two priorities in
this area are helping clients across industries facilitate and thrive in a

low-carbon

economy (Climate Transition) and leveraging our capabilities to advance
economic empowerment (Inclusive Growth).

We have established a Sustainable Finance Group, which serves as the
centralized group that drives climate strategy and sustainability efforts
across our firm, including commercial efforts alongside our businesses to
advance Climate Transition and Inclusive Growth. In 2020, we created a new
role, Global Head of Sustainability and Inclusive Growth, which, like our

One Goldman Sachs

initiative, is intended to facilitate the application of our full capabilities
across both Climate Transition and Inclusive Growth. Each of our segments has
launched a Sustainability Council. These councils focus on identifying key
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) priorities for the segment,
developing sustainability-related capabilities and delivering sustainability-
focused solutions to clients in a holistic way.

Our activities relating to sustainability present both financial and
nonfinancial risks, and we have processes for managing these risks, similar to
the other risks we face. We have integrated oversight of climate-related risks
into our risk management governance structure, from senior management to our
Board and its committees, including the Risk and Public Responsibilities
Committees. The Risk Committee of the Board oversees firmwide financial and
nonfinancial risks, which include climate risk, and, as part of its oversight,
receives updates on our risk management approach to climate risk. The Public
Responsibilities Committee of the Board assists the Board in its oversight of
our firmwide sustainability strategy and sustainability risks affecting us,
including with respect to climate change. As part of its oversight, the Public
Responsibilities Committee receives periodic updates on our sustainability
strategy, and also periodically reviews our governance and related policies
and processes for sustainability and climate change-related risks. We have
also implemented an Environmental Policy Framework to guide our overall
approach to sustainability issues. We apply this Framework when evaluating
transactions for environmental and social risks and impacts. Our employees
also receive training with respect to environmental and social risks,
including for sectors and industries that we believe have higher potential for
these risks. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations — Risk Management — Overview and Structure of Risk
Management — Climate Risk Management” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about our climate risk management.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

As a leading financial institution, we acknowledge the importance of Climate
Transition for our business. In February 2021, we launched our inaugural
sustainability bond of $800 million, which is aligned with our sustainable
finance framework for future issuances and funds a range of

on-balance

sheet sustainable finance activity. In addition, we are working with various
external groups to develop methods, metrics and frameworks for the financial
sector, with an aim to support greater consistency, comparability and utility
in approaches to measuring the financial sector’s contribution to Climate
Transition initiatives. We believe we can advance sustainability by partnering
with our clients across our businesses, including by developing new
sustainability-linked financing solutions, offering strategic advice, or
coinvesting alongside our clients in clean energy companies. We have announced
a target to deploy $750 billion in sustainable financing, investing and
advisory activity by the beginning of 2030. As of December 2021, we achieved
approximately 40% of that goal, with the majority dedicated to Climate
Transition. In addition, we have announced our commitment to align our
financing activities with a

net-zero-by-2050

pathway. In that context, we have set an initial set of targets for 2030
focused on three sectors — power, oil and gas, and auto manufacturing — where
we believe we can have the most significant impact and we see an opportunity
to proactively engage our clients, investors, advocacy groups and multi-
stakeholder organizations, deploy capital required for transition, and invest
in new commercial solutions to drive decarbonization in the real economy.
Carbon neutrality is also a priority for the operation of our firm and our
supply chain. In 2015, we achieved carbon neutrality in our operations and
business travel, ahead of our 2020 goal announced in 2009. We have expanded
our operational carbon commitment to include our supply chain, targeting

net-zero

carbon emissions by 2030.

In addition to Climate Transition, our approach to sustainability also centers
on Inclusive Growth and advancing economic empowerment and financial
opportunity for all. We have sponsored initiatives, such as

One

Million Black Women,

Launch With GS, our Urban Investment Group, 10,000 Women and 10,000 Small
Businesses

. An overarching theme of our sustainability strategy is promoting diversity
and inclusion as an imperative for us, as well as our clients and their
boards. These efforts are further strengthened by strategic partnerships that
we have established in areas where we have identified gaps, or believe we are
able to drive even greater impact through collaboration. We also believe our
ability to achieve our sustainability objectives is critically dependent on
the strengths and talents of our people, and we recognize that our people are
able to maximize their impact by collaborating in a diverse and inclusive work
environment. See “Business — Human Capital Management” for information about
our human capital management goals, programs and policies.

Competition

The financial services industry and all of our businesses are intensely
competitive, and we expect them to remain so. Our competitors are other
entities that provide investment banking (including transaction banking),
market-making, investment management services, commercial and/or consumer
lending, deposit-taking and other banking products and services, as well as
those entities that make investments in securities, commodities, derivatives,
real estate, loans and other financial assets. These entities include brokers
and dealers, investment banking firms, commercial banks, credit card issuers,
insurance companies, investment advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds, private
equity funds, merchant banks, consumer finance companies and financial
technology and other internet-based companies. We compete with some entities
globally and with others on a regional, product or niche basis. We compete
based on a number of factors, including transaction execution, client
experience, products and services, innovation, reputation and price.

We have faced, and expect to continue to face, pressure to retain market share
by committing capital to businesses or transactions on terms that offer
returns that may not be commensurate with their risks. In particular,
corporate clients seek such commitments (such as agreements to participate in
their loan facilities) from financial services firms in connection with
investment banking and other assignments.

Consolidation and convergence have significantly increased the capital base
and geographic reach of some of our competitors, and have also hastened the
globalization of the securities and other financial services markets. As a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our international operations
and to execute large global transactions. To capitalize on some of our most
significant opportunities, we will have to compete successfully with financial
institutions that are larger and have more capital and that may have a
stronger local presence and longer operating history outside the U.S.

We also compete with smaller institutions that offer more targeted services,
such as independent advisory firms. Some clients may perceive these firms to
be less susceptible to potential conflicts of interest than we are, and, as
described below, our ability to effectively compete with them could be
affected by regulations and limitations on activities that apply to us but may
not apply to them.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

A number of our businesses are subject to intense price competition. Efforts
by our competitors to gain market share have resulted in pricing pressure in
our investment banking, market-making, consumer, wealth management and asset
management businesses. For example, the increasing volume of trades executed
electronically, through the internet and through alternative trading systems,
has increased the pressure on trading commissions, in that commissions for
electronic trading are generally lower than those for

non-electronic

trading. It appears that this trend toward

low-commission

trading will continue. Price competition has also led to compression in the
difference between the price at which a market participant is willing to sell
an instrument and the price at which another market participant is willing to
buy it (i.e., bid/offer spread), which has affected our market-making
businesses. The increasing prevalence of passive investment strategies that
typically have lower fees than other strategies we offer has affected the
competitive and pricing dynamics for our asset management products and
services. In addition, we believe that we will continue to experience
competitive pressures in these and other areas in the future as some of our
competitors seek to obtain market share by further reducing prices, and as we
enter into or expand our presence in markets that may rely more heavily on
electronic trading and execution. We and other banks also compete for deposits
on the basis of the rates we offer. Increases in short-term interest rates are
expected to result in more intense competition in deposit pricing.

We also compete on the basis of the types of financial products and client
experiences that we and our competitors offer. In some circumstances, our
competitors may offer financial products that we do not offer and that our
clients may prefer, or our competitors may develop technology platforms that
provide a better client experience.

The provisions of the U.S. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), the requirements promulgated by the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) and other financial
regulations could affect our competitive position to the extent that
limitations on activities, increased fees and compliance costs or other
regulatory requirements do not apply, or do not apply equally, to all of our
competitors or are not implemented uniformly across different jurisdictions.
For example, the provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act that prohibit proprietary
trading and restrict investments in certain hedge and private equity funds
differentiate between U.S.-based and

non-U.S.-based

banking organizations and give

non-U.S.-based

banking organizations greater flexibility to trade outside of the U.S. and to
form and invest in funds outside the U.S.

Likewise, the obligations with respect to derivative transactions under Title
VII of the Dodd-Frank Act depend, in part, on the location of the
counterparties to the transaction. The impact of regulatory developments on
our competitive position has depended and will continue to depend to a large
extent on the manner in which the required rulemaking and regulatory guidance
evolve, the extent of international convergence, and the development of market
practice and structures under the evolving regulatory regimes, as described
further in “Regulation” below.

We also face intense competition in attracting and retaining qualified
employees. Our ability to continue to compete effectively has depended and
will continue to depend upon our ability to attract new employees, retain and
motivate our existing employees and to continue to compensate employees
competitively amid intense public and regulatory scrutiny on the compensation
practices of large financial institutions. Our pay practices and those of
certain of our competitors are subject to review by, and the standards of, the
FRB and other regulators inside and outside the U.S., including the Prudential
Regulation Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the
U.K. We also compete for employees with institutions whose pay practices are
not subject to regulatory oversight. See “Regulation — Compensation Practices”
and “Risk Factors — Competition — Our businesses may be adversely affected if
we are unable to hire and retain qualified employees” in Part I, Item 1A of
this

Form 10-K

for further information about such regulation.

Regulation

As a participant in the global financial services industry, we are subject to
extensive regulation and supervision worldwide. The regulatory regimes
applicable to our operations worldwide have been, and continue to be, subject
to significant changes. The Basel Committee is the primary global standard
setter for prudential bank regulation; however, its standards do not become
effective in a jurisdiction until the relevant regulators have adopted rules
to implement its standards. The implications of these regulations for our
businesses depend to a large extent on their implementation by the relevant
regulators globally, and the market practices and structures that develop.

New regulations have been adopted or are being considered by regulators and
policy makers worldwide, as described below. The effects of any changes to the
regulations affecting our businesses, including as a result of the proposals
described below, are uncertain and will not be known until such changes are
finalized and market practices and structures develop under the revised
regulations.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our principal subsidiaries operating in the U.S. include GS Bank USA, Goldman
Sachs & Co. LLC (GS&Co.), J. Aron & Company LLC (J. Aron) and Goldman Sachs
Asset Management, L.P. Our principal subsidiaries operating in Europe include
Goldman Sachs International (GSI), GSIB and Goldman Sachs Asset Management
International (GSAMI), which are incorporated and headquartered in the U.K.,
and Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE (GSBE), which is incorporated and
headquartered in Germany. Our principal subsidiaries operating in Asia include
Goldman Sachs Japan Co., Ltd. (GSJCL).

As a result of the U.K.’s withdrawal from the E.U. (Brexit), we have
strengthened the capabilities of our E.U. operating subsidiaries, particularly
GSBE, and have moved certain activities there. For example, we have moved a
number of relationships with clients of our Investment Banking, Global Markets
and Wealth Management businesses from GSI and GSIB to GSBE, and clients of our
Asset Management business from GSAMI to GSBE; established access for GSBE to
exchanges, clearing houses and depositories and other market infrastructure in
the E.U.; established branches of GSBE in several E.U. member states and in
the U.K.; and strengthened the capital, personnel and other resources at GSBE.

Banking Supervision and Regulation

Group Inc. is a BHC under the U.S. Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (BHC Act)
and an FHC under amendments to the BHC Act effected by the U.S. Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act of 1999 (GLB Act), and is subject to supervision and examination by
the FRB, which is our primary regulator.

The FRB’s rating system for large financial institutions is aligned with its
supervisory program and is comprised of component ratings for capital planning
and positions, liquidity risk management and positions, and governance and
controls.

Under the system of “functional regulation” established under the BHC Act, the
primary regulators of our U.S.

non-bank

subsidiaries directly regulate the activities of those subsidiaries, with the
FRB exercising a supervisory role. Such “functionally regulated” subsidiaries
include broker-dealers and security-based swap dealers registered with the
SEC, such as our principal U.S. broker-dealer, GS&Co., entities registered
with or regulated by the CFTC with respect to futures-related and swaps-
related activities and investment advisers registered with the SEC with
respect to their investment advisory activities.

Our principal U.S. bank subsidiary, GS Bank USA, is supervised and regulated
by the FRB, the FDIC, the New York State Department of Financial Services
(NYDFS) and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). GS Bank USA also
has a London branch, which is regulated by the FCA and PRA, and a Tokyo
branch, which is regulated by the Japan Financial Services Agency. We conduct
a number of our activities partially or entirely through GS Bank USA and its
subsidiaries, including: corporate loans (including leveraged lending) and
transaction banking; consumer loans (including installment and credit card
loans); small business loans (including installment, lines of credit and
credit cards); wealth management loans (including mortgages); interest rate,
credit, currency and other derivatives; deposit-taking; and agency lending.

Our E.U. subsidiaries are subject to various E.U. regulations, as well as
national laws, including those implementing European directives. GSBE is
directly supervised by the European Central Bank (ECB) and additionally by
BaFin and Deutsche Bundesbank in the context of the E.U. Single Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM). GSBE’s London branch is regulated by the FCA. GSBE engages in
certain activities primarily in the E.U., including underwriting and market
making in debt and equity securities and derivatives, investment, asset and
wealth management services, deposit-taking, lending (including securities
lending), and financial advisory services and is a primary dealer for
government bonds issued by E.U. sovereigns. On July 1, 2021, GSBE became a
subsidiary of GS Bank USA. As a foreign bank subsidiary of GS Bank USA, GSBE
is subject to limits on the nature and scope of its activities under the FRB’s
Regulation K, including limits on its underwriting and market making in equity
securities based on GSBE’s and/or GS Bank USA’s capital.

Goldman Sachs Paris Inc. et Cie (GSPIC) is an investment firm regulated by the
French Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority and the Financial
Markets Authority. GSPIC’s activities include certain activities that GSBE is
prevented from undertaking. GSPIC applied in October 2021 to become a credit
institution.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our principal subsidiaries in the U.K. include GSI, a U.K. broker-dealer and a
designated investment firm, and GSIB, a U.K. bank. Both GSI and GSIB are
regulated by the PRA and the FCA. As an investment firm, GSI is subject to
prudential requirements applicable to banks, including capital and liquidity
requirements. GSI provides broker-dealer services in and from the U.K. and is
registered with the CFTC as a swap dealer and with the SEC as a securities-
based swap dealer. GSIB engages in lending (including securities lending) and
deposit-taking activities and is a primary dealer for U.K. government bonds.
GSI and GSIB maintain branches outside of the U.K. and are subject to the laws
and regulations of the jurisdictions where they are located.

Capital and Liquidity Requirements.

We and GS Bank USA are subject to regulatory risk-based capital and leverage
requirements that are calculated in accordance with the regulations of the FRB
(Capital Framework). The Capital Framework is largely based on the Basel
Committee’s framework for strengthening the regulation, supervision and risk
management of banks (Basel III) and also implements certain provisions of the
Dodd-Frank Act. Under the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies’ tailoring
framework, we and GS Bank USA are subject to “Category I” standards because we
have been designated as a global systemically important bank

(G-SIB).

Accordingly, we and GS Bank USA are “Advanced approach” banking organizations.
Under the Capital Framework, we and GS Bank USA must meet specific regulatory
capital requirements that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities
and certain

off-balance

sheet items. The sufficiency of our capital levels is also subject to
qualitative judgments by regulators. We and GS Bank USA are also subject to
liquidity requirements established by the U.S. federal bank regulatory
agencies.

GSBE is subject to capital and liquidity requirements prescribed in the E.U.
Capital Requirements Regulation, as amended (CRR), and the E.U. Capital
Requirements Directive, as amended (CRD), which are largely based on Basel
III.

The most recent previous amendments to the CRR and CRD (respectively, CRR II
and CRD V) include changes to the market risk, counterparty credit risk, large
exposures and leverage ratio frameworks. These changes have been applicable in
the E.U. since June 2021.

GSI and GSIB are subject to the U.K. capital and liquidity frameworks, which
are also largely based on Basel III and remain predominantly aligned with the
E.U. capital and liquidity frameworks. Amendments similar to CRR II and CRD V
became applicable in the U.K. on January 1, 2022. Requirements established by
E.U. and U.K. authorities are therefore similar to those applicable to GS Bank
USA and us.

Risk-Based Capital Ratios.

As Advanced approach banking organizations, we and GS Bank USA calculate risk-
based capital ratios in accordance with both the Standardized and Advanced
Capital Rules. Both the Advanced Capital Rules and the Standardized Capital
Rules include minimum risk-based capital requirements and additional capital
conservation buffer requirements that must be satisfied solely with Common
Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital. Failure to satisfy a buffer requirement in full
would result in constraints on capital distributions and discretionary
executive compensation. The severity of the constraints would depend on the
amount of the shortfall and the organization’s “eligible retained income,”
defined as the greater of (i) net income for the four preceding quarters, net
of distributions and associated tax effects not reflected in net income; and
(ii) the average of net income over the preceding four quarters. For Group
Inc., the capital conservation buffer requirements consist of a 2.5% buffer
(under the Advanced Capital Rules), a stress capital buffer (SCB) (under the
Standardized Capital Rules), and both a countercyclical buffer and the

G-SIB

surcharge (under both Capital Rules). For GS Bank USA, the capital
conservation buffer requirements consist of a 2.5% buffer and the
countercyclical capital buffer.

The SCB is based on the results of the Federal Reserve’s supervisory stress
tests and our planned common stock dividends and is likely to change over time
based on the results of the annual supervisory stress tests. See “Stress Tests
and Capital Planning” below. The countercyclical capital buffer is designed to
counteract systemic vulnerabilities and currently applies only to banking
organizations subject to Category I, II or III standards, including us and GS
Bank USA. Several other national supervisors also require countercyclical
capital buffers. The

G-SIB

surcharge and countercyclical capital buffer applicable to us may change in
the future including due to additional guidance from our regulators and/or
positional changes. As a result, the minimum capital ratios to which we are
subject are likely to change over time.

The U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies have a rule that implements the
Basel Committee’s standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk
exposures in connection with derivative contracts

(SA-CCR).

Under the rule, “Advanced approach” banking organizations are required to use

SA-CCR

for calculating their standardized risk-weighted assets (RWAs) and, with some
adjustments, for purposes of determining their supplementary leverage ratios
(SLRs) discussed below.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The capital requirements applicable to GSBE, GSI and GSIB include both minimum
requirements and buffers. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Capital Management and
Regulatory Capital” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K

and Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of
this

Form 10-K

for information about our capital ratios and those of GS Bank USA, GSBE, GSI
and GSIB.

The Basel Committee standards include guidelines for calculating incremental
capital ratio requirements for banking institutions that are systemically
significant from a domestic but not global perspective

(D-SIBs).

Depending on how these guidelines are implemented by national regulators, they
may apply, among others, to certain subsidiaries of

G-SIBs.

These guidelines are in addition to the framework for

G-SIBs,

but are more principles-based. The CRD and CRR provide that institutions that
are systemically important at the E.U. or member state level, known as other
systemically important institutions

(O-SIIs),

may be subject to additional capital ratio requirements, according to their
degree of systemic importance

(O-SII

buffers). In 2021, BaFin identified GSBE as an

O-SII

in Germany and set an

O-SII

buffer, applicable from January 1, 2022.

In the U.K., the PRA has identified Goldman Sachs Group UK Limited (GSG UK),
the parent company of GSI and GSIB, as an

O-SII

but has not applied an

O-SII

buffer.

The Basel Committee has finalized revisions to the framework for calculating
capital requirements for market risk as part of its Fundamental Review of the
Trading Book (FRTB). These revisions are expected to increase market risk
capital requirements for most banking organizations and large broker-dealers
subject to bank capital requirements. The revised framework, among other
things, revises the standardized and internal model-based approaches used to
calculate market risk requirements and clarifies the scope of positions
subject to market risk capital requirements. The Basel Committee framework
contemplates that national regulators implement the revised framework by
January 1, 2023. The U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies have not yet
proposed rules implementing the revised framework. Under the CRR, E.U.
financial institutions commenced reporting their market risk calculations
under the revised framework in the third quarter of 2021. U.K. authorities
have not yet proposed rules to implement this framework.

The Basel Committee published standards that it described as the finalization
of the Basel III post-crisis regulatory reforms (Basel III Revisions). These
standards set a floor on internally modeled capital requirements at a
percentage of the capital requirements under the standardized approach. They
also revise the Basel Committee’s standardized and internal model-based
approaches for credit risk, provide a new standardized approach for
operational risk capital and revise the frameworks for credit valuation
adjustment (CVA) risk. The Basel Committee framework contemplates that
national regulators implement these standards by January 1, 2023, and that the
new floor be phased in through January 1, 2028. In July 2020, the Basel
Committee finalized further revisions to the framework for CVA risk, which are
intended to align that framework with the market risk framework.

The U.S. federal bank regulatory authorities have not yet proposed rules
implementing the Basel III Revisions for purposes of their risk-based capital
ratios. The European Commission proposed rules to implement the Basel III
Revisions in October 2021. The proposed E.U. rules contemplate amendments to
the CRR and the CRD, referred to as CRR III and CRD VI, to take effect in
January 2025. The U.K. authorities have not yet released a proposal on the
Basel III Revisions.

The Basel Committee has also published an updated securitization framework and
a revised

G-SIB

assessment methodology, but the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies have not
yet proposed rules implementing them. The updated securitization framework has
been implemented in the E.U. and U.K.

Leverage Ratios.

Under the Capital Framework, we and GS Bank USA are subject to Tier 1 leverage
ratios and SLRs established by the FRB. As a

G-SIB,

the SLR requirements applicable to us include both a minimum requirement and a
buffer requirement, which operates in the same manner as the risk-based buffer
requirements described above. In April 2018, the FRB and the OCC issued a
proposed rule which would (i) replace the current 2% SLR buffer for

G-SIBs,

including us, with a buffer equal to 50% of their

G-SIB

surcharge and (ii) revise the 6% SLR requirement for Category I banks, such as
GS Bank USA, to be “well capitalized” with a requirement equal to 3% plus 50%
of their parent’s

G-SIB

surcharge. This proposal, together with the adopted rule requiring use of

SA-CCR

for purposes of calculating the SLR, would implement certain of the revisions
to the leverage ratio framework published by the Basel Committee in December

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

GSBE and certain of our U.K. entities, including GSI and GSIB, are also
subject to requirements relating to leverage ratios, which are generally based
on the Basel Committee leverage ratio standards.

See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations — Capital Management and Regulatory Capital” in Part II, Item 7
of this

Form 10-K

and Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of
this

Form 10-K

for information about our and GS Bank USA’s Tier 1 leverage ratios and SLRs,
and GSI’s leverage ratio.

Liquidity Ratios.

The Basel Committee’s framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards and
monitoring requires banking organizations to measure their liquidity against
two specific liquidity tests: the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net
Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR).

The LCR rule issued by the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies and
applicable to both us and GS Bank USA is generally consistent with the Basel
Committee’s framework and is designed to ensure that a banking organization
maintains an adequate level of unencumbered, high-quality liquid assets equal
to or greater than the expected net cash outflows under an acute short-term
liquidity stress scenario. We and GS Bank USA are required to maintain a
minimum LCR of 100%. See “Available Information” below and “Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations —
Capital Management and Regulatory Capital” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K

for information about our average daily LCR.

GSBE is subject to the LCR rule issued by the European Commission, and GSI and
GSIB are subject to the U.K. prudential framework’s LCR rules. These rules are
generally consistent with the Basel Committee’s framework.

The NSFR is designed to promote medium- and long-term stable funding of the
assets and

off-balance

sheet activities of banking organizations over a

one-year

time horizon. The Basel Committee’s NSFR framework requires banking
organizations to maintain a minimum NSFR of 100%.

The U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule, which became
effective in July 2021, implementing the NSFR for large U.S. banking
organizations, including us and GS Bank USA. We will be required to publicly
disclose our quarterly average daily NSFR semiannually beginning in 2023. The
CRR implemented the NSFR for certain E.U. financial institutions, including
GSBE, which became effective in June 2021. The NSFR requirement implemented in
the U.K. became effective in January 2022 and is applicable to both GSI and
GSIB.

The FRB’s enhanced prudential standards require BHCs with $100 billion or more
in total consolidated assets to comply with enhanced liquidity and overall
risk management standards, which include maintaining a level of highly liquid
assets based on projected funding needs for 30 days, and increased involvement
by boards of directors in liquidity and overall risk management. Although the
liquidity requirement under these rules has some similarities to the LCR, it
is a separate requirement. GSBE also has its own liquidity planning process,
which incorporates internally designed stress tests and those required under
German regulatory requirements and the ECB Guide to Internal Liquidity
Adequacy Assessment Process (ILAAP). GSI and GSIB have their own liquidity
planning processes, which incorporate internally designed stress tests
developed in accordance with the guidelines of the PRA’s ILAAP.

See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations — Risk Management — Overview and Structure of Risk Management”
and “— Liquidity Risk Management” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K

for information about the LCR and NSFR, as well as our risk management
practices and liquidity.

Stress Tests and Capital Planning.

The FRB’s Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) is designed to
ensure that large BHCs, including us, have sufficient capital to permit
continued operations during times of economic and financial stress. As
required by the FRB, we perform an annual capital stress test and incorporate
the results into an annual capital plan, which we submit to the FRB for
review. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations — Risk Management — Overview and Structure of Risk
Management — Capital Risk Management” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about our annual capital plan. As described in
“Available Information” below, summary results of the annual stress test are
published on our website.

As part of the CCAR process, the FRB evaluates our plan to make capital
distributions across a range of macroeconomic and company-specific
assumptions, based on our and the FRB’s own stress tests.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The FRB’s rule applicable to BHCs with $100 billion or more in total
consolidated assets, including us, replaced the static 2.5% component of the
capital conservation buffer required under the Standardized Capital Rules with
the SCB. The SCB reflects stressed losses estimated under the supervisory
severely adverse scenario of the CCAR stress tests, as calculated by the FRB,
and includes four quarters of planned common stock dividends. The SCB, which
is subject to a 2.5% floor, is generally effective on October 1 of each year
and remains in effect until October 1 of the following year, unless it is
reset in connection with the resubmission of a capital plan. See “Available
Information” below and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations — Capital Management and Regulatory
Capital” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K

for information about our SCB requirement.

The final rule implementing the SCB requires a BHC to receive the FRB’s
approval for any dividend, stock repurchase or other capital distribution,
other than a capital distribution on a newly issued capital instrument, if the
BHC is required to resubmit its capital plan.

U.S. depository institutions with total consolidated assets of $250 billion or
more that are subsidiaries of U.S.

G-SIBs

are required to submit annual

company-run

stress test results to the FRB. As a result of recent growth in its balance
sheet, GS Bank USA will be required to submit its annual stress test results
in 2022. GSBE also has its own capital and stress testing process, which
incorporates internally designed stress tests and those required under German
regulatory requirements and the ECB Guide to Internal Capital Adequacy
Assessment Process (ICAAP). In addition, GSI and GSIB have their own capital
planning and stress testing processes, which incorporate internally designed
stress tests developed in accordance with the PRA’s ICAAP guidelines.

U.S. federal and state laws impose limitations on the payment of dividends by
U.S. depository institutions, such as GS Bank USA. In general, the amount of
dividends that may be paid by GS Bank USA is limited to the lesser of the
amounts calculated under a recent earnings test and an undivided profits test.
Under the recent earnings test, a dividend may not be paid if the total of all
dividends declared by the entity in any calendar year is in excess of the
current year’s net income combined with the retained net income of the two
preceding years, unless the entity obtains regulatory approval. Under the
undivided profits test, a dividend may not be paid in excess of the entity’s
undivided profits (generally, accumulated net profits that have not been paid
out as dividends or transferred to surplus), unless the entity receives
regulatory and stockholder approval. As a result of dividend payments from GS
Bank USA to Group Inc. in connection with the acquisition of GSBE in July
2021, GS Bank USA cannot currently declare any dividends without regulatory
approval.

The applicable U.S. banking regulators have authority to prohibit or limit the
payment of dividends if, in the banking regulator’s opinion, payment of a
dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in light of the
financial condition of the banking organization.

Source of Strength.

The Dodd-Frank Act requires BHCs to act as a source of strength to their U.S.
bank subsidiaries and to commit capital and financial resources to support
those subsidiaries. This support may be required by the FRB at times when BHCs
might otherwise determine not to provide it. Capital loans by a BHC to a U.S.
subsidiary bank are subordinate in right of payment to deposits and to certain
other indebtedness of the subsidiary bank. In addition, if a BHC commits to a
U.S. federal banking agency that it will maintain the capital of its bank
subsidiary, whether in response to the FRB’s invoking its

source-of-strength

authority or in response to other regulatory measures, that commitment will be
assumed by the bankruptcy trustee for the BHC and the bank will be entitled to
priority payment in respect of that commitment, ahead of other creditors of
the BHC.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Transactions Between Affiliates.

Transactions between GS Bank USA or its subsidiaries, including GSBE, and
Group Inc. or its other subsidiaries and affiliates are subject to
restrictions under the Federal Reserve Act and regulations issued by the FRB.
These laws and regulations generally limit the types and amounts of
transactions (such as loans and other credit extensions, including credit
exposure arising from resale agreements, securities borrowing and derivative
transactions, from GS Bank USA or its subsidiaries to Group Inc. or its other
subsidiaries and affiliates and purchases of assets by GS Bank USA or its
subsidiaries from Group Inc. or its other subsidiaries and affiliates) that
may take place and generally require those transactions, to the extent
permitted, to be on market terms or better to GS Bank USA or its subsidiaries.
These laws and regulations generally do not apply to transactions between GS
Bank USA and its subsidiaries. Similarly, German regulatory requirements
provide that certain transactions between GSBE and GS Bank USA or its other
affiliates, including Group Inc., must be on market terms and are subject to
special internal approval requirements. PRA rules provide similar requirements
for transactions between GSI and GSIB and their respective affiliates.

The BHC Act prohibits the FRB from requiring a payment by a BHC subsidiary to
a depository institution if the functional regulator of that subsidiary
objects to the payment. In that case, the FRB could instead require the
divestiture of the depository institution and impose operating restrictions
pending the divestiture.

Resolution and Recovery Plans.

We are required by the FRB and the FDIC to submit a periodic plan for our
rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or
failure (resolution plan). If these regulators jointly determine that an
institution has failed to remediate identified shortcomings in its resolution
plan or that its resolution plan, after any permitted resubmission, is not
credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code, they may jointly impose more stringent capital, leverage or
liquidity requirements or restrictions on growth, activities or operations, or
may jointly order the institution to divest assets or operations, in order to
facilitate orderly resolution in the event of failure. The FRB and FDIC have a
rule requiring U.S.

G-SIBs

to submit resolution plans on a

two-year

cycle (alternating between full and targeted submissions). We submitted our
2021 resolution plan, which was a targeted submission, in June 2021. Our next
required submission is a full submission by July 1, 2023. See “Risk Factors —
The application of Group Inc.’s proposed resolution strategy could result in
greater losses for Group Inc.’s security holders” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

and “Available Information” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about our resolution plan.

We are also required by the FRB to submit, on a periodic basis, a global
recovery plan that outlines the steps that we could take to reduce risk,
maintain sufficient liquidity and conserve capital in times of prolonged
stress. Certain of our subsidiaries are also subject to similar recovery plan
requirements.

The FDIC has issued a rule requiring each insured depository institution (IDI)
with $50 billion or more in assets, such as GS Bank USA, to provide a
resolution plan. Our resolution plan for GS Bank USA must, among other things,
demonstrate that it is adequately protected from risks arising from our other
entities. GS Bank USA’s most recent resolution plan was submitted in June
2018. In January 2021, the FDIC announced its intention to require resolution
plan submissions for IDIs with $100 billion or more in assets, including GS
Bank USA. In June 2021, the FDIC issued guidance for those resolution plans.
This guidance splits covered IDIs into two groups for purposes of the timing
of resolution plan submissions, and GS Bank USA is in the second group with a
later submission date.

The U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies have adopted rules imposing
restrictions on qualified financial contracts (QFCs) entered into by

G-SIBs.

The rules are intended to facilitate the orderly resolution of a failed

G-SIB

by limiting the ability of the

G-SIB

to enter into a QFC unless (i) the counterparty waives certain default rights
in such contract arising upon the entry of the

G-SIB

or one of its affiliates into resolution, (ii) the contract does not contain
enumerated prohibitions on the transfer of such contract and/or any related
credit enhancement, and (iii) the counterparty agrees that the contract will
be subject to the special resolution regimes set forth in the Dodd-Frank Act
orderly liquidation authority (OLA) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Act of
1950 (FDIA), described below. GS Bank USA has achieved compliance by adhering
to the International Swaps and Derivatives Association Universal Resolution
Stay Protocol (ISDA Universal Protocol) and International Swaps and
Derivatives Association 2018 U.S. Resolution Stay Protocol (U.S. ISDA
Protocol) described below.

Certain of our subsidiaries also adhere to these protocols. The ISDA Universal
Protocol imposes a stay on certain cross-default and early termination rights
within standard ISDA derivative contracts and securities financing
transactions between adhering parties in the event that one of them is subject
to resolution in its home jurisdiction, including a resolution under OLA or
the FDIA in the U.S. The U.S. ISDA Protocol, which was based on the ISDA
Universal Protocol, was created to allow market participants to comply with
the final QFC rules adopted by the federal bank regulatory agencies.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The E.U. Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), as amended by the BRRD
II, establishes a framework for the recovery and resolution of financial
institutions in the E.U., such as GSBE. The BRRD provides national supervisory
authorities with tools and powers to

pre-emptively

address potential financial crises in order to promote financial stability and
minimize taxpayers’ exposure to losses. The BRRD requires E.U. member states
to grant certain resolution powers to national and, where relevant, E.U.
resolution authorities, including the power to impose a temporary stay and to
recapitalize a failing entity by writing down its unsecured debt or converting
its unsecured debt into equity. Financial institutions in the E.U. must
provide that contracts governed by

non-E.U.

law recognize those temporary stay and

bail-in

powers unless doing so would be impracticable. GSBE is under the direct
authority of the Single Resolution Board for resolution planning. Regulatory
authorities in the E.U. may require financial institutions in the E.U.,
including subsidiaries of

non-E.U.

groups, to submit recovery plans and to assist the relevant resolution
authority in constructing resolution plans for the E.U. entities. GSBE’s
primary regulator with respect to recovery planning is the ECB, and it is also
regulated by BaFin and Deutsche Bundesbank.

The U.K. Special Resolution Regime confers substantially the same powers on
the Bank of England, as the U.K. resolution authority, and substantially the
same requirements on U.K. financial institutions. Further, certain U.K.
financial institutions, including GSI and GSIB, are required to meet the Bank
of England’s expectations contained in the U.K. Resolution Assessment
Framework, including with respect to loss absorbency, contractual stays,
operational continuity and funding in resolution. They are also required by
the PRA to submit solvent wind-down plans on how they could be wound down in a
stressed environment. The PRA is also the regulatory authority in the U.K.
that supervises recovery planning, and GSI and GSIB are each required to
submit recovery plans to the PRA.

Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC).

The FRB has issued a rule addressing U.S. implementation of the Financial
Stability Board’s (FSB’s) TLAC principles and term sheet on minimum TLAC
requirements for

G-SIBs.

The rule (i) establishes minimum TLAC requirements; (ii) establishes minimum
requirements for “eligible long-term debt” (i.e., debt that is unsecured, has
a maturity of at least one year from issuance and satisfies certain additional
criteria); (iii) prohibits certain parent company transactions; and (iv) caps
the amount of parent company liabilities that are not eligible long-term debt.

The rule also prohibits a BHC that has been designated as a U.S.

G-SIB

from (i) guaranteeing subsidiaries’ liabilities that are subject to early
termination provisions if the BHC enters into an insolvency or receivership
proceeding, subject to an exception for guarantees permitted by rules of the
U.S. federal banking agencies imposing restrictions on QFCs; (ii) incurring
liabilities guaranteed by subsidiaries; (iii) issuing short-term debt to third
parties; or (iv) entering into derivatives and certain other financial
contracts with external counterparties.

Additionally, the rule caps, at 5% of the value of the parent company’s
eligible TLAC, the amount of unsecured

non-contingent

third-party liabilities that are not eligible long-term debt that could rank
equally with or junior to eligible long-term debt.

The FRB, the OCC and the FDIC issued a final rule, effective April 1, 2021,
requiring “Advanced approach” banking organizations, such as us, to deduct
from their own regulatory capital certain investments above thresholds in
unsecured debt instruments issued by

G-SIBs,

including those issued for purposes of satisfying TLAC requirements.

The CRR and the BRRD are designed to, among other things, implement the FSB’s
minimum TLAC requirement for

G-SIBs.

For example, the CRR requires E.U. subsidiaries of a

non-E.U.

G-SIB

to meet internal TLAC requirements if they exceed the threshold of 5% of the

G-SIB’s

RWAs, operating income or leverage exposure. GSBE does not currently exceed
these thresholds. Under the U.K. financial services regime, GSG UK exceeds the
applicable thresholds and therefore, it is subject to internal TLAC
requirements.

The CRD requires a

non-E.U.

group with more than €40 billion of assets in the E.U., such as us, to
establish an E.U. intermediate holding company (E.U. IHC) by December 30, 2023
if it has, as in our case, two or more of certain types of E.U. financial
institution subsidiaries, including broker-dealers and banks. A

non-E.U.

group may have two E.U. IHCs if a request for a second is approved. The CRR
requires E.U. IHCs to satisfy capital and liquidity requirements, a minimum
requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL), and certain other
prudential requirements at a consolidated level. The U.K. has not implemented
the requirement for an IHC; however, the PRA has introduced a requirement to
approve or exempt certain U.K. financial holding companies, including GSG UK,
which became effective in January 2022.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The BRRD II and the U.K. resolution regime subject institutions to an MREL,
which is generally consistent with the FSB’s TLAC standard. In June 2018, the
Bank of England published a statement of policy on internal MREL, which
requires a material U.K. subsidiary of an overseas banking group, such as GSI,
to meet a minimum internal MREL requirement to facilitate the transfer of
losses to its resolution entity, which for GSI is Group Inc. The transitional
minimum internal MREL requirement became fully effective on January 1, 2022.
In order to comply with the MREL statement of policy, we have provided the
Bank of England the right to exercise

bail-in

triggers over certain intercompany regulatory capital and senior debt
instruments issued by GSI. These triggers enable the Bank of England to write
down such instruments or convert such instruments to equity. The triggers can
be exercised by the Bank of England if it determines that GSI has reached the
point of

non-viability

and the FRB and the FDIC have not objected to the

bail-in

or if Group Inc. enters bankruptcy or similar proceedings.

Insolvency of a BHC or IDI.

The Dodd-Frank Act created a resolution regime, OLA, for BHCs and their
affiliates that are systemically important. Under OLA, the FDIC may be
appointed as receiver for the systemically important institution and its
failed

non-bank

subsidiaries if, upon the recommendation of applicable regulators, the U.S.
Secretary of the Treasury determines, among other things, that the institution
is in default or in danger of default, that the institution’s failure would
have serious adverse effects on the U.S. financial system and that resolution
under OLA would avoid or mitigate those effects.

If the FDIC is appointed as receiver under OLA, then the powers of the
receiver, and the rights and obligations of creditors and other parties who
have dealt with the institution, would be determined under OLA, and not under
the bankruptcy or insolvency law that would otherwise apply. The powers of the
receiver under OLA are generally based on the powers of the FDIC as receiver
for depository institutions under the FDIA, described below.

Substantial differences in the rights of creditors exist between OLA and the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code, including the right of the FDIC under OLA to disregard
the strict priority of creditor claims in some circumstances, the use of an
administrative claims procedure to determine creditors’ claims (as opposed to
the judicial procedure utilized in bankruptcy proceedings), and the right of
the FDIC to transfer claims to a “bridge” entity. In addition, OLA limits the
ability of creditors to enforce certain contractual cross-defaults against
affiliates of the institution in receivership. The FDIC has issued a notice
that it would likely resolve a failed FHC by transferring its assets to a
“bridge” holding company under its “single point of entry” or “SPOE” strategy
pursuant to OLA.

Under the FDIA, if the FDIC is appointed as conservator or receiver for an IDI
such as GS Bank USA, upon its insolvency or in certain other events, the FDIC
has broad powers, including the power:

To transfer any of the IDI’s assets and liabilities to a new obligor,
including a newly formed “bridge” bank, without the approval of the depository
institution’s creditors;  

To enforce the IDI’s contracts pursuant to their terms without regard to any
provisions triggered by the appointment of the FDIC in that capacity; or  

To repudiate or disaffirm any contract or lease to which the IDI is a party,
the performance of which is determined by the FDIC to be burdensome and the
repudiation or disaffirmance of which is determined by the FDIC to promote the
orderly administration of the IDI.  

In addition, the claims of holders of domestic deposit liabilities and certain
claims for administrative expenses against an IDI would be afforded a priority
over other general unsecured claims, including deposits at

non-U.S.

branches and claims of debtholders of the IDI, in the “liquidation or other
resolution” of such an institution by any receiver. As a result, whether or
not the FDIC ever sought to repudiate any debt obligations of GS Bank USA, the
debtholders (other than depositors at U.S. branches) would be treated
differently from, and could receive, if anything, substantially less than, the
depositors at U.S. branches of GS Bank USA.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Deposit Insurance.

Deposits at GS Bank USA have the benefit of FDIC insurance up to the
applicable limits. The FDIC’s Deposit Insurance Fund is funded by assessments
on IDIs. GS Bank USA’s assessment (subject to adjustment by the FDIC) is
currently based on its average total consolidated assets less its average
tangible equity during the assessment period, its supervisory ratings and
specified forward-looking financial measures used to calculate the assessment
rate. The deposits of GSBE are covered by the German statutory deposit
protection program to the extent provided by law. In addition, GSBE has
elected to participate in the German voluntary deposit protection program
which provides insurance for certain eligible deposits not covered by the
German statutory deposit program. Deposits at GSIB are covered by the U.K.
Financial Services Compensation Scheme up to the applicable limits.

Prompt Corrective Action.

The U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991
(FDICIA) requires the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies to take “prompt
corrective action” in respect of depository institutions that do not meet
specified capital requirements. FDICIA establishes five capital categories for
FDIC-insured banks, such as GS Bank USA: well-capitalized, adequately
capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized and critically
undercapitalized.

An institution may be downgraded to, or deemed to be in, a capital category
that is lower than is indicated by its capital ratios if it is determined to
be in an unsafe or unsound condition or if it receives an unsatisfactory
examination rating with respect to certain matters. FDICIA imposes
progressively more restrictive constraints on operations, management and
capital distributions, as the capital category of an institution declines.
Failure to meet the capital requirements could also require a depository
institution to raise capital. Ultimately, critically undercapitalized
institutions are subject to the appointment of a receiver or conservator, as
described in “Insolvency of an IDI or a BHC” above.

The prompt corrective action regulations do not apply to BHCs. However, the
FRB is authorized to take appropriate action at the BHC level, based upon the
undercapitalized status of the BHC’s depository institution subsidiaries. In
certain instances, relating to an undercapitalized depository institution
subsidiary, the BHC would be required to guarantee the performance of the
undercapitalized subsidiary’s capital restoration plan and might be liable for
civil money damages for failure to fulfill its commitments on that guarantee.
Furthermore, in the event of the bankruptcy of the BHC, the guarantee would
take priority over the BHC’s general unsecured creditors, as described in
“Source of Strength” above.

Volcker Rule and Other Restrictions on Activities.

As a BHC, we are subject to limitations on the types of business activities in
which we may engage.

Volcker Rule.

The Volcker Rule prohibits “proprietary trading,” but permits activities such
as underwriting, market making and risk-mitigation hedging, requires an
extensive compliance program and includes additional reporting and record-
keeping requirements.

In addition, the Volcker Rule limits the sponsorship of, and investment in,
“covered funds” (as defined in the rule) by banking entities, including us. It
also limits certain types of transactions between us and our sponsored and
advised funds, similar to the limitations on transactions between depository
institutions and their affiliates. Covered funds include our private equity
funds, certain of our credit and real estate funds, our hedge funds and
certain other investment structures. The limitation on investments in covered
funds requires us to limit our investment in each such fund to 3% or less of
the fund’s net asset value, and to limit our aggregate investment in all such
funds to 3% or less of our Tier 1 capital.

The FRB has extended the conformance period to July 2022 for our investments
in, and relationships with, certain legacy “illiquid funds” (as defined in the
Volcker Rule) that were in place prior to December 2013. See Note 8 to the
consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about our investments in such funds.

Other Restrictions.

FHCs generally can engage in a broader range of financial and related
activities than are otherwise permissible for BHCs as long as they continue to
meet the eligibility requirements for FHCs. The broader range of permissible
activities for FHCs includes underwriting, dealing and making markets in
securities and making investments in

non-FHCs

(merchant banking activities). In addition, certain FHCs, including us, are
permitted to engage in certain commodities activities in the U.S. that may
otherwise be impermissible for BHCs, so long as the assets held pursuant to
these activities do not equal 5% or more of their consolidated assets.

The FRB, however, has the authority to limit an FHC’s ability to conduct
activities that would otherwise be permissible, and will likely do so if the
FHC does not satisfactorily meet certain requirements of the FRB. For example,
if an FHC or any of its U.S. depository institution subsidiaries ceases to
maintain its status as well-capitalized or well-managed, the FRB may impose
corrective capital and/or managerial requirements, as well as additional
limitations or conditions. If the deficiencies persist, the FHC may be
required to divest its U.S. depository institution subsidiaries or to cease
engaging in activities other than the business of banking and certain closely
related activities.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

If any IDI subsidiary of an FHC fails to maintain at least a “satisfactory”
rating under the Community Reinvestment Act, the FHC would be subject to
restrictions on certain new activities and acquisitions.

In addition, we are required to obtain prior FRB approval before certain
acquisitions and before engaging in certain banking and other financial
activities both within and outside the U.S.

The FRB issued a proposed rule in September 2016 which, if adopted, would
impose new requirements on the physical commodity activities and certain
merchant banking activities of FHCs, including, among other things, additional
capital requirements, stringent quantitative limits on permissible physical
trading activity, and new public reporting requirements. At that time, the FRB
recommended that Congress repeal authorities for FHCs to engage in merchant
banking activities and for certain FHCs to engage in certain otherwise
impermissible commodities activities.

U.S.

G-SIBs,

like us, are also required to comply with a rule regarding single counterparty
credit limits, which imposes more stringent requirements for credit exposures
among major financial institutions. The Dodd-Frank Act also requires the FRB
to implement early remediation requirements, which were proposed in 2011 but
not finalized.

The New York State banking law imposes lending limits (which take into account
credit exposure from derivative transactions) and other requirements that
could impact the manner and scope of GS Bank USA’s activities.

The U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies have issued guidance that focuses on
transaction structures and risk management frameworks and that outlines high-
level principles for

safe-and-sound

leveraged lending, including underwriting standards, valuation and stress
testing. This guidance has, among other things, limited the percentage amount
of debt that can be included in certain transactions.

As a German credit institution, GSBE will become subject to Volcker Rule-type
prohibitions under German banking law and regulations once its financial
assets exceed certain thresholds. Prohibited activities will then include
proprietary trading, certain types of high-frequency trading and certain types
of lending and guarantee businesses with defined prohibited counterparties,
such as hedge funds and other highly leveraged funds, unless an exclusion or
an exemption applies. See “Volcker Rule” above for further information.

U.K. banks that have over £25 billion of core retail deposits are required to
separate their retail banking services from their investment and international
banking activities, commonly known as “ring-fencing.” GSIB is not currently
subject to the ring-fencing requirement, and if it were to become subject to
it, GSIB would need to make significant operational and structural changes.

Broker-Dealer and Securities Regulation

Our broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to regulations that cover all
aspects of the securities business, including sales methods, trade practices,
the use and safekeeping of clients’ funds and securities, capital structure,
record-keeping, the financing of clients’ purchases, and the conduct of
directors, officers and employees. In the U.S., the SEC is the federal agency
responsible for the administration of the federal securities laws. GS&Co. is
registered as a broker-dealer, a securities-based swap dealer, a municipal
advisor and an investment adviser with the SEC and as a broker-dealer in all
50 states and the District of Columbia. U.S. self-regulatory organizations,
such as FINRA and the NYSE, adopt rules that apply to, and examine, broker-
dealers such as GS&Co.

U.S. state securities and other U.S. regulators also have regulatory or
oversight authority over GS&Co. For a description of net capital requirements
applicable to GS&Co., see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations — Capital Management and Regulatory
Capital — U.S. Regulated Broker-Dealer Subsidiaries” in Part II, Item 7 of
this

Form 10-K.

The SEC issued a proposed rule in November 2021 which, if adopted, would
require lenders of securities to provide the material terms of securities
lending transactions to a registered national securities association, such as
FINRA.

In Europe, we provide broker-dealer services, including through GSBE (which is
a credit institution), GSPIC and GSI, that are subject to oversight by
European and national regulators. These services are regulated in accordance
with E.U., U.K. and national laws and regulations. These laws require, among
other things, compliance with certain capital adequacy and liquidity
standards, customer protection requirements and market conduct and trade
reporting rules. Certain of our European subsidiaries are also regulated by
the securities, derivatives and commodities exchanges of which they are
members.

GSJCL, our regulated Japanese broker-dealer, is subject to capital
requirements imposed by Japan’s Financial Services Agency. GSJCL is also
regulated by the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of
Finance, among others.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The Securities and Futures Commission in Hong Kong, the China Securities
Regulatory Commission, the Reserve Bank of India, the Securities and Exchange
Board of India,

the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, the Australian
Securities Exchange, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the Korean Financial
Supervisory Service and the Central Bank of Brazil, among others, regulate
various of our subsidiaries and also have capital standards and other
requirements comparable to the rules of the U.S. regulators.

Our exchange-based market-making activities are subject to extensive
regulation by a number of securities exchanges. As a market maker on
exchanges, we are required to maintain orderly markets in the securities to
which we are assigned.

In the E.U. and the U.K., the European Markets in Financial Instruments
Directive (MiFID II) includes extensive market structure reforms, such as the
establishment of new trading venue categories for the purposes of discharging
the obligation to trade OTC derivatives on a trading platform and enhanced

pre-

and post-trade transparency covering a wider range of financial instruments.
In equities, MiFID II introduced volume caps on

non-transparent

liquidity trading for trading venues, limited the use of broker-dealer
crossing networks and created a new regime for systematic internalizers, which
are investment firms that execute client transactions outside a trading venue.
Additional control requirements were introduced for algorithmic trading, high
frequency trading and direct electronic access. Commodities trading firms are
required to calculate their positions and adhere to specific position limits.
Other reforms include enhanced transaction reporting, the publication of best
execution data by investment firms and trading venues, transparency on costs
and charges of service to investors, changes to the way investment managers
can pay for the receipt of investment research, rules limiting the payment and
receipt of soft commissions and other forms of inducements, and mandatory
unbundling for broker-dealers between execution and other major services.

The SEC requires broker-dealers to act in the best interest of their
customers. Additionally, SEC rules require broker-dealers to provide a
standardized, short-form disclosure highlighting services offered, applicable
standards of conduct, fees and costs, the differences between brokerage and
advisory services, and any conflicts of interest. Several states have adopted
or proposed adopting uniform fiduciary duty standards applicable to broker-
dealers.

The SEC, FINRA and regulators in various

non-U.S.

jurisdictions have imposed both conduct-based and disclosure-based
requirements with respect to research reports and research analysts and may
impose additional regulations.

GS&Co., GS Bank USA and other U.S. subsidiaries are also subject to rules
adopted by U.S. federal agencies pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act that require
any person who organizes or initiates certain asset-backed securities
transactions to retain a portion (generally, at least five percent) of any
credit risk that the person conveys to a third party. For certain
securitization transactions, retention by third-party purchasers may satisfy
this requirement. Certain of our

non-U.S.

subsidiaries, including GSI, are subject to risk retention requirements in
connection with securitization activities.

Swaps, Derivatives and Commodities Regulation

The commodity futures, commodity options and swaps industry in the U.S. is
subject to regulation under the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act (CEA). The CFTC is
the U.S. federal agency charged with the administration of the CEA. In
addition, the SEC is the U.S. federal agency charged with the regulation of
security-based swaps. The rules and regulations of various self-regulatory
organizations, such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, other futures
exchanges and the National Futures Association, also govern commodity futures,
commodity options and swaps activities.

The terms “swaps” and “security-based swaps” include a wide variety of
derivative instruments in addition to those conventionally referred to as
swaps (including certain forward contracts and options), and relate to a wide
variety of underlying assets or obligations, including currencies,
commodities, interest or other monetary rates, yields, indices, securities,
credit events, loans and other financial obligations.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

CFTC rules require registration of swap dealers, mandatory clearing and
execution of interest rate and credit default swaps and real-time public
reporting and adherence to business conduct standards for all

in-scope

swaps. A number of these requirements, particularly those regarding
recordkeeping and reporting, also apply to transactions that do not involve a
registered swap dealer. GS&Co. and other subsidiaries, including GS Bank USA,
GSBE, GSI and J. Aron, are registered with the CFTC as swap dealers. CFTC
rules establishing capital requirements for swap dealers that are not subject
to the capital rules of a prudential regulator, such as the FRB, became
effective in October 2021. The CFTC has also adopted financial reporting
requirements for covered swap entities and amended existing capital rules for
CFTC-registered futures commission merchants to provide explicit capital
requirements for proprietary positions in swaps and security-based swaps that
are not cleared by a clearing organization. Certain of our registered swap
dealers, including J. Aron, are subject to the CFTC’s capital requirements.

Our affiliates registered as swap dealers are subject to the margin rules
issued by the CFTC (in the case of our

non-bank

swap dealers) and the FRB (in the case of GS Bank USA and GSBE). The rules for
variation margin have become effective, and those for initial margin are in
the process of being phased in through September 2022, depending on certain
activity levels of the swap dealer and the relevant counterparty. Inter-
affiliate transactions under the CFTC and FRB margin rules are generally
exempt from initial margin requirements.

SEC rules govern the registration and regulation of security-based swap
dealers. Security-based swaps are defined as swaps on single securities,
single loans or narrow-based baskets or indices of securities. The SEC has
adopted a number of rules for security-based swap dealers, including (i)
capital, margin and segregation requirements; (ii) record-keeping, financial
reporting and notification requirements; (iii) business conduct standards;
(iv) regulatory and public trade reporting; and (v) the application of risk
mitigation techniques to uncleared portfolios of security-based swaps. The
compliance date for these SEC rules, as well as SEC rules addressing
registration requirements and business conduct standards, was generally
October 2021. In the fourth quarter of 2021, certain of our subsidiaries,
including GS&Co., registered with the SEC as security-based swap dealers and
became subject to the SEC’s regulations regarding security-based swaps. The
SEC has recently proposed additional regulations regarding security-based
swaps that would, among other things, require public reporting of large
positions in security-based swaps.

The CFTC and the SEC have adopted rules relating to cross-border regulation of
swaps, securities-based swaps, business conduct and registration requirements.
The CFTC and the SEC have entered into agreements with certain

non-U.S.

regulators regarding the cross-border regulation of derivatives and the mutual
recognition of cross-border execution facilities and clearing houses, and have
approved substituted compliance with certain

non-U.S.

regulations related to certain business conduct requirements and margin rules.
The U.S. prudential regulators have not yet made a determination with respect
to substituted compliance for transactions subject to

non-U.S.

margin rules.

Similar types of regulation have been proposed or adopted in jurisdictions
outside the U.S., including in the E.U. and Japan. Under the European Market
Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR), for example, the E.U. and the U.K. have
established regulatory requirements relating to portfolio reconciliation and
reporting, clearing certain OTC derivatives and margining for uncleared
derivatives activities. In addition, under the European Markets in Financial
Instruments Directive and Regulation, transactions in certain types of
derivatives are required to be executed on regulated platforms or exchanges.

The CFTC has adopted rules that limit the size of positions in physical
commodity derivatives that can be held by any entity, or any group of
affiliates or other parties trading under common ownership or control. Swap
dealers may currently claim an exemption from the position limits for the bona
fide hedging of swap-related risks, but this exemption will be eliminated in
2023. The CFTC position limits apply to futures on physical commodities and
options on such futures, and these limits apply to both physically and cash
settled positions. In addition, in 2023, the position limit rules will become
applicable to swaps that are economically equivalent to such futures and
options. The position limit rules initially impose limits in the spot month
only (i.e., during the delivery period for the physical commodities, which is
typically a period of several days). CFTC spot and non- spot month limits will
continue to apply to futures on certain legacy agricultural commodities, and
it is possible that

non-spot

month limits will at some point be adopted for other categories of
commodities.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

J. Aron is authorized by the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
to sell wholesale physical power at market-based rates. As a FERC-authorized
power marketer, J. Aron is subject to regulation under the U.S. Federal Power
Act and FERC regulations and to the oversight of FERC. As a result of our
investing activities, Group Inc. is also an “exempt holding company” under the
U.S. Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005 and applicable FERC rules.

In addition, as a result of our power-related and commodities activities, we
are subject to energy, environmental and other governmental laws and
regulations, as described in “Risk Factors — Our commodities activities,
particularly our physical commodities activities, subject us to extensive
regulation and involve certain potential risks, including environmental,
reputational and other risks, that may expose us to significant liabilities
and costs” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K.

GS&Co. is registered with the CFTC as a futures commission merchant, and
several of our subsidiaries, including GS&Co., are registered with the CFTC
and act as commodity pool operators and commodity trading advisors. Goldman
Sachs Financial Markets, L.P. is registered with the SEC as an OTC derivatives
dealer.

Asset Management and Wealth Management Regulation

Our asset management and wealth management businesses are subject to extensive
oversight by regulators around the world relating to, among other things, the
fair treatment of clients, safeguarding of client assets, offerings of funds,
marketing activities, transactions among affiliates and our management of
client funds.

Interpretations issued by the SEC clarify the SEC’s views of the existing
fiduciary duty owed by investment advisers to their clients. Additionally, SEC
rules require investment advisers to provide a standardized, short-form
disclosure highlighting services offered, applicable standards of conduct,
fees and costs, the differences between brokerage and advisory services, and
any conflicts of interest. Several states have adopted or proposed adopting
uniform fiduciary duty standards applicable to advisers.

Certain of our European subsidiaries, including GSBE in the E.U. and GSAMI in
the U.K., are subject to MiFID II and/or related regulations (including the
U.K. legislation making such regulations part of U.K. law), which govern the
approval, organizational, marketing and reporting requirements of U.K. or
E.U.-based investment managers and the ability of investment fund managers
located outside the E.U. or the U.K. to access those markets. Our asset
management business in the U.K. and the E.U. significantly depends on our
ability to delegate parts of our activities to other affiliates.

On January 1, 2022, GSAMI became subject to a new prudential regime for U.K.
investment firms, the Investment Firms Prudential Regime (IFPR), which governs
the prudential requirements for U.K. investment firms prudentially regulated
by the FCA.

Consumer Regulation

Our U.S. consumer-oriented activities are subject to supervision and
regulation by the CFPB with respect to federal consumer protection laws,
including laws relating to fair lending and the prohibition of unfair,
deceptive or abusive acts or practices in connection with the offer, sale or
provision of consumer financial products and services. Our consumer-oriented
activities are also subject to various state and local consumer protection
laws, rules and regulations, which, among other things, impose obligations
relating to marketing, origination, servicing and collections activities in
our consumer businesses. Many of these laws, rules and regulations also apply
to our small business lending activities, which are also subject to
supervision and regulation by federal and state regulators. In addition, our
U.K. consumer deposit-taking activities are subject to consumer protection
regulations.

Compensation Practices

Our compensation practices are subject to oversight by the FRB and, with
respect to some of our subsidiaries and employees, by other regulatory bodies
worldwide.

The FSB has released standards for implementation by local regulators that are
designed to encourage sound compensation practices at banks and other
financial companies. The U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies have also
provided guidance designed to ensure that incentive compensation arrangements
at banking organizations take into account risk and are consistent with safe
and sound practices. The guidance sets forth the following three key
principles with respect to incentive compensation arrangements: (i) the
arrangements should provide employees with incentives that appropriately
balance risk and financial results in a manner that does not encourage
employees to expose their organizations to imprudent risk; (ii) the
arrangements should be compatible with effective controls and risk management;
and (iii) the arrangements should be supported by strong corporate governance.
The guidance provides that supervisory findings with respect to incentive
compensation will be incorporated, as appropriate, into the organization’s
supervisory ratings, which can affect its ability to make acquisitions or
perform other actions. The guidance also notes that enforcement actions may be
taken against a banking organization if its incentive compensation
arrangements or related risk management, control or governance processes pose
a risk to the organization’s safety and soundness.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The Dodd-Frank Act requires U.S. financial regulators, including the FRB and
SEC, to adopt rules on incentive-based payment arrangements at specified
regulated entities having at least $1 billion in total assets. The U.S.
financial regulators proposed revised rules in 2016, which have not been
finalized.

The NYDFS’ guidance emphasizes that any incentive compensation arrangements
tied to employee performance indicators at banking institutions regulated by
the NYDFS, including GS Bank USA, must be subject to effective risk
management, oversight and control.

In the E.U., certain provisions in the CRR and CRD are designed to meet the
FSB’s compensation standards. These provisions limit the ratio of variable to
fixed compensation of all employees at GSBE and of certain employees at our
other operating subsidiaries in the E.U., including those employees identified
as having a material impact on the risk profile of regulated entities. CRR II
and CRD V amended certain aspects of these rules, including, by increasing
minimum variable compensation deferral periods. Substantially similar
requirements apply in the U.K. in relation to GSI and GSIB.

The E.U. has also introduced rules regulating compensation for certain persons
providing services to certain investment funds.

Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Bribery Rules and Regulations

The U.S. Bank Secrecy Act, as amended (BSA), including by the USA PATRIOT Act
of 2001, contains anti-money laundering and financial transparency laws and
authorizes or mandates the promulgation of various regulations applicable to
financial institutions, including standards for verifying client
identification at account opening, and obligations to monitor client
transactions and report suspicious activities. Through these and other
provisions, the BSA seeks, among other things, to promote the identification
of parties that may be involved in terrorism, money laundering or other
suspicious activities.

The Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020 (AMLA), which amends the BSA, was
enacted in January 2021. The AMLA is intended to comprehensively reform and
modernize U.S. anti-money laundering laws. Among other things, the AMLA
codifies a risk-based approach to anti-money laundering compliance for
financial institutions; requires the U.S. Department of the Treasury to
promulgate priorities for anti-money laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism policy; requires the development of standards by the U.S.
Department of the Treasury for testing technology and internal processes for
BSA compliance; expands enforcement- and investigation-related authority,
including a significant expansion in the available sanctions for certain BSA
violations; and expands BSA whistleblower incentives and protections. Many of
the statutory provisions in the AMLA will require additional rulemakings,
reports and other measures, and the impact of the AMLA will depend on, among
other things, rulemaking and implementation guidance. In June 2021, the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), a bureau of the U.S. Department
of Treasury, issued the priorities for anti-money laundering and countering
the financing of terrorism policy, as required under the AMLA. The priorities
include: corruption, cybercrime, terrorist financing, fraud, transnational
crime, drug trafficking, human trafficking and proliferation financing.

We are subject to other laws and regulations worldwide relating to anti-money
laundering and financial transparency, including the E.U. Anti-Money
Laundering Directives. In addition, we are subject to the U.S. Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act (FCPA), the U.K. Bribery Act and other laws and regulations
worldwide regarding corrupt and illegal payments, or providing anything of
value, for the benefit of government officials and others. The scope of the
types of payments or other benefits covered by these laws is very broad. These
laws and regulations include requirements relating to the identification of
clients, monitoring for and reporting suspicious transactions, monitoring
direct and indirect payments to politically exposed persons, providing
information to regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies, and
sharing information with other financial institutions.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Privacy and Cyber Security Regulation

Our businesses are subject to numerous laws and regulations relating to the
privacy of information regarding clients, employees and others. These include
the GLB Act, the E.U.’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the U.K.’s
Data Protection Act 2018, the Japanese Personal Information Protection Act,
the Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China
(PIPL), the Hong Kong Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance, and the California
Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (CCPA). The GDPR has heightened our privacy
compliance obligations, impacted certain of our businesses’ collection,
processing and retention of personal data and imposed strict standards for
reporting data breaches. The GDPR also provides for significant penalties for

non-compliance.

In addition, the CCPA imposes compliance obligations with regard to the
collection, use and disclosure of personal information. The CCPA was amended
in 2020 by the California Privacy Rights Act (CPRA), which, among other
things, will expand the scope of data subject to the CCPA when the CPRA
becomes effective on January 1, 2023. In addition, several other states and

non-U.S.

jurisdictions have enacted, or are proposing, privacy and data protection laws
similar to the GDPR and the CCPA. The PIPL, which went into effect on November
1, 2021, limits the legal bases for processing personal information, contains
heightened notice and consent requirements for the handling of certain types
of personal information and imposes special cross-border data transfer rules
under certain circumstances.

The NYDFS also requires financial institutions regulated by the NYDFS,
including GS Bank USA, to, among other things, (i) establish and maintain a
cyber security program designed to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and
availability of their information systems; (ii) implement and maintain a
written cyber security policy setting forth policies and procedures for the
protection of their information systems and nonpublic information; and (iii)
designate a Chief Information Security Officer.

In November 2021, the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies adopted a rule
regarding notification requirements for banking organizations related to
significant computer-security incidents. Under the final rule, a BHC or state
member bank, such as Group Inc. or GS Bank USA, is required to notify its
primary regulator within 36 hours of incidents that have materially disrupted
or degraded, or are reasonably likely to materially disrupt or degrade, the
banking organization’s ability to deliver services to a material portion of
its customer base, jeopardize the viability of key operations of the banking
organization, or pose a threat to the financial stability of the United
States. The rule is effective April 1, 2022, with compliance required by May

Information about our Executive Officers

Set forth below are the name, age, present title, principal occupation and
certain biographical information for the executive officers who have been
appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, Group Inc.’s Board.

Philip R. Berlinski, 45

Mr. Berlinski has been Global Treasurer since October 2021; he also serves as
Chief Executive Officer of Goldman Sachs Bank USA. He had previously served as
Chief Operating Officer of Global Equities from May 2019. Prior to that, he
was

Co-Head

of Global Equities Trading and Execution Services from September 2016 to May

Denis P. Coleman III, 48

Mr. Coleman has been Chief Financial Officer since January 2022. He had
previously served as Deputy Chief Financial Officer from September 2021 and,
prior to that,

Co-Head

of the Global Financing Group from June 2018 to September 2021. From 2016 to
June 2018, he was Head of the EMEA Financing Group, and from 2009 to 2016 he
was Head of EMEA Credit Finance in London.

Sheara J. Fredman, 46

Ms. Fredman has been Controller and Chief Accounting Officer since November
2019. She had previously served as Head of Regulatory Controllers from
September 2017 and, prior to that, she had served as Global Product
Controller.

Brian J. Lee, 55

Mr. Lee has been Chief Risk Officer since November 2019. He had previously
served as Controller and Chief Accounting Officer from March 2017 and, prior
to that, he had served as Deputy Controller from 2014.

Ericka T. Leslie, 51

Ms. Leslie has been Chief Administrative Officer since February 18, 2022. She
had previously served as Global Head of Operations and Platform Engineering
for the Global Markets Division from March 2020, as Global Head of Operations
for the Securities Division from January 2019 and as Head of Global Operations
for the Commodities business from September 2008.

John F.W. Rogers, 65

Mr. Rogers has been an Executive Vice President since April 2011 and Chief of
Staff and Secretary to the Board since December 2001.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Kathryn H. Ruemmler, 50

Ms. Ruemmler has been the Chief Legal Officer, General Counsel and Secretary
since March 2021, and was previously Global Head of Regulatory Affairs from
April 2020. From June 2014 to April 2020, Ms. Ruemmler was a Litigation
Partner at Latham & Watkins LLP, a global law firm, where she was Global Chair
of the White Collar Defense and Investigations practice.

David Solomon, 60

Mr. Solomon has been Chairman of the Board since January 2019 and Chief
Executive Officer and a director since October 2018. He had previously served
as President and Chief or Co-Chief Operating Officer from January 2017 and

Co-Head

of the Investment Banking Division from July 2006 to December 2016.

John E. Waldron, 52

Mr. Waldron has been President and Chief Operating Officer since October 2018.
He had previously served as

Co-Head

of the Investment Banking Division from December 2014. Prior to that he was
Global Head of Investment Banking Services/Client Coverage for the Investment
Banking Division and had oversight of the Investment Banking Services
Leadership Group, and from 2007 to 2009 was Global

Co-Head

of the Financial Sponsors Group.

Available Information

Our internet address is

www.goldmansachs.com

and the investor relations section of our website is located at

www.goldmansachs.com/investor-relations

, where we make available, free of charge, our annual reports on

Form 10-K,

quarterly reports on

Form 10-Q

and current reports on

Form 8-K

and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a)
or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, as well as proxy statements, as soon as
reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or
furnish it to, the SEC. Also posted on our website, and available in print
upon request of any shareholder to our Investor Relations Department (Investor
Relations), are our certificate of incorporation and

by-laws,

charters for our Audit, Risk, Compensation, Corporate Governance and
Nominating, and Public Responsibilities Committees, our Policy Regarding
Director Independence Determinations, our Policy on Reporting of Concerns
Regarding Accounting and Other Matters, our Corporate Governance Guidelines
and our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics governing our directors, officers
and employees. Within the time period required by the SEC, we will post on our
website any amendment to the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics and any
waiver applicable to any executive officer, director or senior financial
officer.

Our website also includes information about (i) purchases and sales of our
equity securities by our executive officers and directors; (ii) disclosure
relating to certain

non-GAAP

financial measures (as defined in the SEC’s Regulation G) that we may make
public orally, telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by other means;
(iii) DFAST results; (iv) the public portion of our resolution plan
submission; (v) our Pillar 3 disclosure; (vi) our average daily LCR; (vii) our
People Strategy Report; (viii) our Sustainability Report; and (ix) our Task
Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) Report.

Investor Relations can be contacted at The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., 200 West
Street, 29th Floor, New York, New York 10282, Attn: Investor Relations,
telephone:

e-mail:

gs-investor-relations@gs.com

. We use the following, as well as other social media channels, to disclose
public information to investors, the media and others:

Our website (

www.goldmansachs.com

Our Twitter account (

twitter.com/GoldmanSachs

); and  

Our Instagram account (

instagram.com/GoldmanSachs

Our officers may use similar social media channels to disclose public
information. It is possible that certain information we or our officers post
on our website and on social media could be deemed material, and we encourage
investors, the media and others interested in Goldman Sachs to review the
business and financial information we or our officers post on our website and
on the social media channels identified above. The information on our website
and those social media channels is not incorporated by reference into this

Form 10-K.

Forward-Looking Statements

We have included in this

Form 10-K,

and our management may make, statements that may constitute “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the U.S.
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements
are not historical facts or statements of current conditions, but instead
represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their
nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control.

By identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to
the possibility that our actual results, financial condition, liquidity and
capital actions may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results,
financial condition, liquidity and capital actions in these forward-looking
statements. Important factors that could cause our results, financial
condition, liquidity and capital actions to differ from those in these
statements include, among others, those described below and in “Risk Factors”
in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

These statements may relate to, among other things, (i) our future plans and
results, including our target ROE, ROTE, efficiency ratio, CET1 capital ratio
and firmwide assets under supervision (AUS) inflows, and how they can be
achieved, (ii) trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses, including
the timing, costs, profitability, benefits and other aspects of business and
strategic initiatives and their impact on our efficiency ratio, (iii) our
level of future compensation expense, including as a percentage of both
operating expenses and revenues net of provision for credit losses, (iv) our
investment banking transaction backlog and future results, (v) our expected
interest income and interest expense, (vi) our expense savings and strategic
locations initiatives, (vii) expenses we may incur, including future
litigation expense and expenses from investing in our consumer and transaction
banking businesses, (viii) the projected growth of our deposits and other
funding, asset liability management and funding strategies and related
interest expense savings, (ix) our business initiatives, including transaction
banking and new consumer financial products, (x) our planned 2022 benchmark
debt issuances, (xi) the amount, composition and location of global core
liquid assets (GCLA) we expect to hold, (xii) our credit exposures, (xiii) our
expected provisions for credit losses, (xiv) the adequacy of our allowance for
credit losses, (xv) the projected growth of our consumer lending and credit
card businesses, (xvi) the objectives and effectiveness of our business
continuity plan (BCP), information security program, risk management and
liquidity policies, (xvii) our resolution plan and strategy and their
implications for stakeholders, (xviii) the design and effectiveness of our
resolution capital and liquidity models and triggers and alerts framework,
(xix) the results of stress tests, the effect of changes to regulations, and
our future status, activities or reporting under banking and financial
regulation, (xx) our expected tax rate, (xxi) the future state of our
liquidity and regulatory capital ratios, and our prospective capital
distributions (including dividends and repurchases), (xxii) our expected SCB
and

G-SIB

surcharge, (xxiii) legal proceedings, governmental investigations or other
contingencies, (xxiv) the asset recovery guarantee and our remediation
activities related to our 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) settlements,
(xxv) the replacement of IBORs and our transition to alternative risk-free
reference rates, (xxvi) the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic on our business, results, financial position and liquidity, (xxvii)
the effectiveness of our management of our human capital, including our
diversity goals, (xxviii) our sustainability and carbon neutrality targets and
goals, (xxix) our plans for our people to return to our offices, (xxx) future
inflation and (xxxi) our completed, announced and prospective acquisitions,
including our completed acquisition of the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio and our announced acquisitions of NN Investment Partners
and GreenSky.

Statements about our target return on average common shareholders’ equity
(ROE), return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity (ROTE),
efficiency ratio and expense savings, and how they can be achieved, are based
on our current expectations regarding our business prospects and are subject
to the risk that we may be unable to achieve our targets due to, among other
things, changes in our business mix, lower profitability of new business
initiatives, increases in technology and other costs to launch and bring new
business initiatives to scale, and increases in liquidity requirements.

Statements about our target ROE, ROTE and CET1 capital ratio, and how they can
be achieved, are based on our current expectations regarding the capital
requirements applicable to us and are subject to the risk that our actual
capital requirements may be higher than currently anticipated because of,
among other factors, changes in the regulatory capital requirements applicable
to us resulting from changes in regulations or the interpretation or
application of existing regulations or changes in the nature and composition
of our activities. Statements about our firmwide AUS inflows targets are based
on our current expectations regarding our fundraising prospects and are
subject to the risk that actual inflows may be lower than expected due to,
among other factors, competition from other asset managers, changes in
investment preferences and changes in economic or market conditions.

Statements about the timing, costs, profitability, benefits and other aspects
of business and expense savings initiatives, the level and composition of more
durable revenues and increases in market share are based on our current
expectations regarding our ability to implement these initiatives and actual
results may differ, possibly materially, from current expectations due to,
among other things, a delay in the timing of these initiatives, increased
competition and an inability to reduce expenses and grow businesses with
durable revenues.

Statements about the level of future compensation expense, including as a
percentage of both operating expenses and revenues net of provision for credit
losses, and our efficiency ratio as our platform business initiatives reach
scale are subject to the risks that the compensation and other costs to
operate our businesses, including platform initiatives, may be greater than
currently expected.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Statements about our investment banking transaction backlog and future results
are subject to the risk that such transactions may be modified or may not be
completed at all and related net revenues may not be realized or may be
materially less than expected. Important factors that could have such a result
include, for underwriting transactions, a decline or weakness in general
economic conditions, an outbreak of hostilities, volatility in the securities
markets or an adverse development with respect to the issuer of the securities
and, for financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities markets,
an inability to obtain adequate financing, an adverse development with respect
to a party to the transaction or a failure to obtain a required regulatory
approval. For information about other important factors that could adversely
affect our investment banking transactions, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item
1A of this

Form 10-K.

Statements about the projected growth of our deposits and other funding, asset
liability management and funding strategies and related interest expense
savings, and our consumer lending and credit card businesses, are subject to
the risk that actual growth and savings may differ, possibly materially, from
that currently anticipated due to, among other things, changes in interest
rates and competition from other similar products.

Statements about planned 2022 benchmark debt issuances and the amount,
composition and location of GCLA we expect to hold are subject to the risk
that actual issuances and GCLA levels may differ, possibly materially, from
that currently expected due to changes in market conditions, business
opportunities or our funding and projected liquidity needs.

Statements about our expected provisions for credit losses are subject to the
risk that actual credit losses may differ and our expectations may change,
possibly materially, from that currently anticipated due to, among other
things, changes to the composition of our loan portfolio and changes in the
economic environment in future periods and our forecasts of future economic
conditions, as well as changes in our models, policies and other management
judgments.

Statements about our future effective income tax rate are subject to the risk
that it may differ from the anticipated rate indicated in such statements,
possibly materially, due to, among other things, changes in the tax rates
applicable to us, changes in our earnings mix, our profitability and entities
in which we generate profits, the assumptions we have made in forecasting our
expected tax rate, the interpretation or application of existing tax statutes
and regulations, as well as any corporate tax legislation that may be enacted
or any guidance that may be issued by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service.

Statements about the future state of our liquidity and regulatory capital
ratios (including our SCB and

G-SIB

surcharge), and our prospective capital distributions (including dividends and
repurchases), are subject to the risk that our actual liquidity, regulatory
capital ratios and capital distributions may differ, possibly materially, from
what is currently expected due to, among other things, the need to use capital
to support clients, increased regulatory requirements resulting from changes
in regulations or the interpretation or application of existing regulations,
results of applicable supervisory stress tests and changes to the composition
of our balance sheet.

Statements about the risk exposure related to the asset recovery guarantee
provided to the Government of Malaysia are subject to the risk that the actual
value of, or credit received for, assets and proceeds from assets seized and
returned to the Government of Malaysia may be less than currently anticipated.
Statements about the progress or the status of remediation activities relating
to 1MDB are based on our expectations regarding our current remediation plans.
Accordingly, our ability to complete the remediation activities may change,
possibly materially, from what is currently expected.

Statements about our objectives in management of our human capital, including
our diversity goals, are based on our current expectations and are subject to
the risk that we may not achieve these objectives and goals due to, among
other things, competition in recruiting and attracting diverse candidates and
unsuccessful efforts in retaining diverse employees.

Statements about our sustainability and carbon neutrality targets and goals
are based on our current expectations and are subject to the risk that we may
not achieve these targets and goals due to, among other things, global socio-
demographic and economic trends, energy prices, lack of technological
innovations, climate-related conditions and weather events, legislative and
regulatory changes, and other unforeseen events or conditions.

Statements about our plans for our people to return to our offices are based
on our current expectations and that return may be delayed due to, among other
factors, future events that are unpredictable, including the course of the

COVID-19

pandemic, responses of governmental authorities, the emergence of new variants
of

COVID-19

and the effectiveness of vaccines over the long term and against new variants.

Statements about future inflation are subject to the risk that actual
inflation may differ, possibly materially, due to, among other things, changes
in economic growth, unemployment or consumer demand.

Statements about our announced acquisitions of NN Investment Partners and
GreenSky are subject to the risk that the transaction may not close on the
timeline contemplated or at all, including due to a failure to obtain
requisite regulatory approval.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Item 1A. Risk Factors

We face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in our
businesses.

The following is a summary of some of the more important factors that could
affect our businesses:

Market

Our businesses have been and may in the future be adversely affected by
conditions in the global financial markets and broader economic conditions.  

Our businesses have been and may in the future be adversely affected by
declining asset values, particularly where we have net “long” positions,
receive fees based on the value of assets managed, or receive or post
collateral.  

Our market-making activities have been and may in the future be affected by
changes in the levels of market volatility.  

Our investment banking, client intermediation, asset management and wealth
management businesses have been adversely affected and may in the future be
adversely affected by market uncertainty or lack of confidence among investors
and CEOs due to declines in economic activity and other unfavorable economic,
geopolitical or market conditions.  

Our asset management and wealth management businesses have been and may in the
future be adversely affected by the poor investment performance of our
investment products or a client preference for products other than those which
we offer or for products that generate lower fees.  

Liquidity

Our liquidity, profitability and businesses may be adversely affected by an
inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets.  

Our businesses have been and may in the future be adversely affected by
disruptions or lack of liquidity in the credit markets, including reduced
access to credit and higher costs of obtaining credit.  

Reductions in our credit ratings or an increase in our credit spreads may
adversely affect our liquidity and cost of funding.  

Group Inc. is a holding company and its liquidity depends on payments from its
subsidiaries, many of which are subject to legal, regulatory and other
restrictions on providing funds or assets to Group Inc.  

Credit

Our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely affected by
deterioration in the credit quality of or defaults by third parties.  

Concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, underwriting, investing and financing activities.  

Derivative transactions and delayed documentation or settlements may expose us
to credit risk, unexpected risks and potential losses.  

Operational

A failure in our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third
parties, as well as human error, malfeasance or other misconduct, could impair
our liquidity, disrupt our businesses, result in the disclosure of
confidential information, damage our reputation and cause losses.  

A failure to protect our computer systems, networks and information, and our
clients’ information, against cyber attacks and similar threats could impair
our ability to conduct our businesses, result in the disclosure, theft or
destruction of confidential information, damage our reputation and cause
losses.  

We may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and
strategies.  

We may incur losses as a result of unforeseen or catastrophic events,
including pandemics, terrorist attacks, extreme weather events or other
natural disasters.  

Climate change could disrupt our businesses and adversely affect client
activity levels and the creditworthiness of our clients and counterparties,
and our efforts to address concerns relating to climate change could result in
damage to our reputation.  

Legal and Regulatory

Our businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive
regulation around the world.  

A failure to appropriately identify and address potential conflicts of
interest could adversely affect our businesses.  

We may be adversely affected by increased governmental and regulatory scrutiny
or negative publicity.  

Substantial civil or criminal liability or significant regulatory action
against us could have material adverse financial effects or cause us
significant reputational harm, which in turn could seriously harm our business
prospects.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

In conducting our businesses around the world, we are subject to political,
legal, regulatory and other risks that are inherent in operating in many
countries.  

The application of regulatory strategies and requirements in the U.S. and

non-U.S.

jurisdictions to facilitate the orderly resolution of large financial
institutions could create greater risk of loss for Group Inc.’s security
holders.  

The application of Group Inc.’s proposed resolution strategy could result in
greater losses for Group Inc.’s security holders.  

Our commodities activities, particularly our physical commodities activities,
subject us to extensive regulation and involve certain potential risks,
including environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to
significant liabilities and costs.  

Competition

Our results have been and may in the future be adversely affected by the
composition of our client base.  

The financial services industry is highly competitive.  

The growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new products and
technologies, including trading technologies and cryptocurrencies, has
increased competition.  

Our businesses would be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain
qualified employees.  

Market Developments and General Business Environment

Our businesses, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations have
been and may in the future be adversely affected by the

COVID-19

pandemic.  

Certain of our businesses, our funding instruments and financial products may
be adversely affected by changes in or the discontinuance of Interbank Offered
Rates (IBORs), in particular LIBOR.  

Certain of our businesses and our funding instruments may be adversely
affected by changes in other reference rates, currencies, indexes, baskets or
ETFs to which products we offer or funding that we raise are linked.  

We face enhanced risks as new business initiatives and acquisitions lead us to
engage in new activities, operate in new locations, transact with a broader
array of clients and counterparties and expose us to new asset classes and new
markets.  

We may not be able to fully realize the expected benefits or synergies from
acquisitions in the time frames we expect, or at all.  

The following are detailed descriptions of our Risk Factors summarized above:

Market

Our businesses have been and may in the future be adversely affected by
conditions in the global financial markets and broader economic conditions.

Many of our businesses, by their nature, do not produce predictable earnings,
and all of our businesses are materially affected by conditions in the global
financial markets and economic conditions generally, both directly and through
their impact on client activity levels and creditworthiness. These conditions
can change suddenly and negatively.

Our financial performance is highly dependent on the environment in which our
businesses operate. A favorable business environment is generally
characterized by, among other factors, high global gross domestic product
growth, regulatory and market conditions that result in transparent, liquid
and efficient capital markets, low inflation, business, consumer and investor
confidence, stable geopolitical conditions and strong business earnings.

Unfavorable or uncertain economic and market conditions can be caused by: low
levels of or declines in economic growth, business activity or investor,
business or consumer confidence; changes in consumer spending or borrowing
patterns; pandemics; limitations on the availability or increases in the cost
of credit and capital; illiquid markets; increases in inflation, interest
rates, exchange rate or basic commodity price volatility or default rates;
concerns about sovereign defaults; uncertainty concerning fiscal or monetary
policy, government shutdowns, debt ceilings or funding; the extent of and
uncertainty about potential increases in tax rates and other regulatory
changes; limitations on international trade and travel; laws and regulations
that limit trading in, or the issuance of, securities of issuers outside their
domestic markets; outbreaks of domestic or international tensions or
hostilities, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, cyber security threats or
attacks and other forms of disruption to or curtailment of global
communication, energy transmission or transportation networks or other
geopolitical instability or uncertainty; corporate, political or other
scandals that reduce investor confidence in capital markets; extreme weather
events or other natural disasters; or a combination of these or other factors.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The financial services industry and the securities and other financial markets
have been materially and adversely affected in the past by significant
declines in the values of nearly all asset classes, by a serious lack of
liquidity and by high levels of borrower defaults. In addition, concerns about
the

COVID-19

pandemic, European sovereign debt risk and its impact on the European banking
system, limitations on international trade, and potential or actual changes in
interest rates, inflation and other market conditions, have, at times,
negatively impacted the levels of client activity.

General uncertainty about economic, political and market activities, and the
scope, timing and impact of regulatory reform, as well as weak consumer,
investor and CEO confidence resulting in large part from such uncertainty, has
in the past negatively impacted client activity, which can adversely affect
many of our businesses. Periods of low volatility and periods of high
volatility combined with a lack of liquidity, have at times had an unfavorable
impact on our market-making businesses.

Financial institution returns may be negatively impacted by increased funding
costs due in part to the lack of perceived government support of such
institutions in the event of future financial crises relative to financial
institutions in countries in which governmental support is maintained. In
addition, liquidity in the financial markets has also been negatively impacted
as market participants and market practices and structures continue to adjust
to evolving regulatory frameworks.

Our businesses have been and may in the future be adversely affected by
declining asset values, particularly where we have net “long” positions,
receive fees based on the value of assets managed, or receive or post
collateral.

Many of our businesses have net “long” positions in debt securities, loans,
derivatives, mortgages, equities (including private equity and real estate)
and most other asset classes. These include positions we take when we act as a
principal to facilitate our clients’ activities, including our exchange-based
market-making activities, or commit large amounts of capital to maintain
positions in interest rate and credit products, as well as through our
currencies, commodities, equities and mortgage-related activities. In
addition, we invest in similar asset classes. Substantially all of our
investing and market-making positions and a portion of our loans are

marked-to-market

on a daily or other periodic basis and declines in asset values directly and
promptly impact our earnings, unless we have effectively “hedged” our
exposures to those declines.

In certain circumstances (particularly in the case of credit products,
including leveraged loans, and private equities or other securities that are
not freely tradable or lack established and liquid trading markets), it may
not be possible or economic to hedge our exposures and to the extent that we
do so the hedge may be ineffective or may greatly reduce our ability to profit
from increases in the values of the assets. Sudden declines and significant
volatility in the prices of assets have in the past and may in the future
substantially curtail or eliminate the trading markets for certain assets,
which may make it difficult to sell, hedge or value such assets. The inability
to sell or effectively hedge assets reduces our ability to limit losses in
such positions and the difficulty in valuing assets may negatively affect our
capital, liquidity or leverage ratios, increase our funding costs and
generally require us to maintain additional capital.

In our exchange-based market-making activities, we are obligated by stock
exchange rules to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing
securities in a declining market. In markets where asset values are declining
and in volatile markets, this results in losses and an increased need for
liquidity.

We receive asset-based management fees based on the value of our clients’
portfolios or investment in funds managed by us and, in some cases, we also
receive incentive fees based on increases in the value of such investments.
Declines in asset values would ordinarily reduce the value of our clients’
portfolios or fund assets, which in turn would typically reduce the fees we
earn for managing such assets.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

We post collateral to support our obligations and receive collateral that
supports the obligations of our clients and counterparties. When the value of
the assets posted as collateral or the credit ratings of the party posting
collateral decline, the party posting the collateral may need to provide
additional collateral or, if possible, reduce its trading position. An example
of such a situation is a “margin call” in connection with a brokerage account.
Therefore, declines in the value of asset classes used as collateral mean that
either the cost of funding positions is increased or the size of positions is
decreased. If we are the party providing collateral, this can increase our
costs and reduce our profitability and if we are the party receiving
collateral, this can also reduce our profitability by reducing the level of
business done with our clients and counterparties.

In addition, volatile or less liquid markets increase the difficulty of
valuing assets, which can lead to costly and time-consuming disputes over
asset values and the level of required collateral, as well as increased credit
risk to the recipient of the collateral due to delays in receiving adequate
collateral. In cases where we foreclose on collateral, sudden declines in the
value or liquidity of the collateral has in the past and may in the future,
despite credit monitoring, over-collateralization, the ability to call for
additional collateral or the ability to force repayment of the underlying
obligation, result in significant losses to us, especially where there is a
single type of collateral supporting the obligation. In addition, we have been
and may in the future be subject to claims that the foreclosure was not
permitted under the legal documents, was conducted in an improper manner or
caused a client or counterparty to go out of business.

Our market-making activities have been and may in the future be affected by
changes in the levels of market volatility.

Certain of our market-making activities depend on market volatility to provide
trading and arbitrage opportunities to our clients, and decreases in
volatility have reduced and may in the future reduce these opportunities and
the level of client activity associated with them and adversely affect the
results of these activities. Increased volatility, while it can increase
trading volumes and spreads, also increases risk as measured by

Value-at-Risk

(VaR) and may expose us to increased risks in connection with our market-
making activities or cause us to reduce our inventory in order to avoid
increasing our VaR. Limiting the size of our market-making positions can
adversely affect our profitability. In periods when volatility is increasing,
but asset values are declining significantly, it may not be possible to sell
assets at all or it may only be possible to do so at steep discounts. In those
circumstances we may be forced to either take on additional risk or to realize
losses in order to decrease our VaR. In addition, increases in volatility
increase the level of our RWAs, which increases our capital requirements.

Our investment banking, client intermediation, asset management and wealth
management businesses have been adversely affected and may in the future be
adversely affected by market uncertainty or lack of confidence among investors
and CEOs due to declines in economic activity and other unfavorable economic,
geopolitical or market conditions.

Our investment banking business has been and may in the future be adversely
affected by market conditions. Poor economic conditions and other uncertain
geopolitical conditions may adversely affect and have in the past adversely
affected investor and CEO confidence, resulting in significant industry-wide
declines in the size and number of underwritings and of financial advisory
transactions, which would likely have an adverse effect on our revenues and
our profit margins. In particular, because a significant portion of our
investment banking revenues is derived from our participation in large
transactions, a decline in the number of large transactions has in the past
and would in the future adversely affect our investment banking business.
Similarly, in recent years, cross-border initial public offerings and other
securities offerings have accounted for a significant proportion of new
issuance activity. Legislative, regulatory or other changes that limit trading
in, or the issuance of, securities outside the issuers’ domestic markets have
in the past and would in the future adversely affect our underwriting
business.

In certain circumstances, market uncertainty or general declines in market or
economic activity may adversely affect our client intermediation businesses by
decreasing levels of overall activity or by decreasing volatility, but at
other times market uncertainty and even declining economic activity may result
in higher trading volumes or higher spreads or both.

Market uncertainty, volatility and adverse economic conditions, as well as
declines in asset values, may cause our clients to transfer their assets out
of our funds

or other products or their brokerage accounts and result in reduced net
revenues, principally in our asset management and wealth management
businesses. Even if clients do not withdraw their funds, they may invest them
in products that generate less fee income.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our asset management and wealth management businesses have been and may in the
future be adversely affected by the poor investment performance of our
investment products or a client preference for products other than those which
we offer or for products that generate lower fees.

Poor investment returns in our asset management and wealth management
businesses, due to either general market conditions or underperformance
(relative to our competitors or to benchmarks) by funds or accounts that we
manage or investment products that we design or sell, affects our ability to
retain existing assets and to attract new clients or additional assets from
existing clients. This could affect the management and incentive fees that we
earn on AUS or the commissions and net spreads that we earn for selling other
investment products, such as structured notes or derivatives. To the extent
that our clients choose to invest in products that we do not currently offer,
we will suffer outflows and a loss of management fees. Further, if, due to
changes in investor sentiment or the relative performance of certain asset
classes or otherwise, clients continue to invest in products that generate
lower fees (e.g., passively managed or fixed income products), our average
effective management fee would continue to decline and our asset management
and wealth management businesses could be adversely affected.

Liquidity

Our liquidity, profitability and businesses may be adversely affected by an
inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets.

Liquidity is essential to our businesses. It is of critical importance to us,
as most of the failures of financial institutions have occurred in large part
due to insufficient liquidity. Our liquidity may be impaired by an inability
to access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an inability to raise or
retain deposits, an inability to access funds from our subsidiaries or
otherwise allocate liquidity optimally, an inability to sell assets or redeem
our investments, lack of timely settlement of transactions, unusual deposit
outflows, or other unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral, such as in March
2020, when corporate clients drew on revolving credit facilities in response
to the

COVID-19

pandemic. This situation may arise due to circumstances that we may be unable
to control, such as a general market or economic disruption or an operational
problem that affects third parties or us, or even by the perception among
market participants that we, or other market participants, are experiencing
greater liquidity risk.

We employ structured products to benefit our clients and hedge our own risks.
The financial instruments that we hold and the contracts to which we are a
party are often complex, and these complex structured products often do not
have readily available markets to access in times of liquidity stress. Our
investing and financing activities may lead to situations where the holdings
from these activities represent a significant portion of specific markets,
which could restrict liquidity for our positions.

Further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired if there is not generally
a liquid market for such assets, as well as in circumstances where other
market participants are seeking to sell similar otherwise generally liquid
assets at the same time, as is likely to occur in a liquidity or other market
crisis or in response to changes to rules or regulations. For example,
recently an investment management firm with large positions with several
financial institutions defaulted, resulting in rapidly declining prices in the
securities underlying those positions. In addition, clearinghouses, exchanges
and other financial institutions with which we interact may exercise

set-off

rights or the right to require additional collateral, including in difficult
market conditions, which could further impair our liquidity.

Regulatory changes relating to liquidity may also negatively impact our
results of operations and competitive position. Numerous regulations have been
adopted to introduce more stringent liquidity requirements for large financial
institutions. These regulations address, among other matters, liquidity stress
testing, minimum liquidity requirements, wholesale funding, limitations on the
issuance of short-term debt and structured notes, deductions for holdings of
TLAC and prohibitions on parent guarantees that are subject to certain cross-
defaults. New and prospective liquidity-related regulations may overlap with,
and be impacted by, other regulatory changes, including rules relating to
minimum long-term debt requirements and TLAC, guidance on the treatment of
brokered deposits and the capital, leverage and resolution and recovery
frameworks applicable to large financial institutions. Given the overlap and
complex interactions among these new and prospective regulations, they may
have unintended cumulative effects, and their full impact will remain
uncertain, while regulatory reforms are being adopted and market practices
develop. In addition, our need to manage our operations in light of certain
regulatory requirements when applicable thresholds are met has in the past
limited and may in the future limit our ability to raise deposits in GSIB or
other funding, which could adversely affect our liquidity or ability to
respond efficiently to liquidity stress.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our businesses have been and may in the future be adversely affected by
disruptions or lack of liquidity in the credit markets, including reduced
access to credit and higher costs of obtaining credit.

Widening credit spreads, as well as significant declines in the availability
of credit, have in the past adversely affected our ability to borrow on a
secured and unsecured basis and may do so in the future. We fund ourselves on
an unsecured basis by issuing long-term debt and commercial paper, by raising
deposits at our bank subsidiaries, by issuing hybrid financial instruments and
by obtaining loans or lines of credit from commercial or other banking
entities. We seek to finance many of our assets on a secured basis. Any
disruptions in the credit markets may make it harder and more expensive to
obtain funding for our businesses. If our available funding is limited or we
are forced to fund our operations at a higher cost, these conditions may
require us to curtail our business activities and increase our cost of
funding, both of which could reduce our profitability, particularly in our
businesses that involve investing, lending and market making.

Our clients engaging in mergers, acquisitions and other types of strategic
transactions often rely on access to the secured and unsecured credit markets
to finance their transactions. A lack of available credit or an increased cost
of credit can adversely affect the size, volume and timing of our clients’
merger and acquisition transactions, particularly large transactions, and
adversely affect our financial advisory and underwriting businesses.

Our credit businesses have been and may in the future be negatively affected
by a lack of liquidity in credit markets. A lack of liquidity reduces price
transparency, increases price volatility and decreases transaction volumes and
size, all of which can increase transaction risk or decrease the profitability
of these businesses.

Reductions in our credit ratings or an increase in our credit spreads may
adversely affect our liquidity and cost of funding.

Our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. A reduction in our credit
ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and competitive position,
increase our borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or
trigger our obligations under certain provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. Under these provisions, counterparties
could be permitted to terminate contracts with us or require us to post
additional collateral. Termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity by
requiring us to find other sources of financing or to make significant cash
payments or securities movements.

As of December 2021, our counterparties could have called for additional
collateral or termination payments related to our net derivative liabilities
under bilateral agreements in an aggregate amount of $345 million in the event
of a

one-notch

downgrade of our credit ratings and $1.54 billion in the event of a

two-notch

downgrade of our credit ratings. A downgrade by any one rating agency,
depending on the agency’s relative ratings of us at the time of the downgrade,
may have an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all
rating agencies. For further information about our credit ratings, see
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations — Risk Management — Liquidity Risk Management — Credit Ratings” in
Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K.

Our cost of obtaining long-term unsecured funding is directly related to our
credit spreads (the amount in excess of the interest rate of benchmark
securities that we need to pay). Increases in our credit spreads can
significantly increase our cost of this funding. Changes in credit spreads are
continuous, market-driven, and subject at times to unpredictable and highly
volatile movements. Our credit spreads are also influenced by market
perceptions of our creditworthiness and movements in the costs to purchasers
of credit default swaps referenced to our long-term debt. The market for
credit default swaps has proven to be extremely volatile and at times has
lacked a high degree of transparency or liquidity.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Group Inc. is a holding company and its liquidity depends on payments and
loans from its subsidiaries, many of which are subject to legal, regulatory
and other restrictions on providing funds or assets to Group Inc.

Group Inc. is a holding company and, therefore, depends on dividends,
distributions, loans and other payments from its subsidiaries to fund share
repurchases and dividend payments and to fund payments on its obligations,
including debt obligations. Many of our subsidiaries, including our broker-
dealer and bank subsidiaries, are subject to laws that restrict dividend
payments or authorize regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds
from those subsidiaries to Group Inc.

In addition, our broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries are subject to
restrictions on their ability to lend or transact with affiliates and to
minimum regulatory capital and other requirements, as well as restrictions on
their ability to use funds deposited with them in brokerage or bank accounts
to fund their businesses. Additional restrictions on related-party
transactions, increased capital and liquidity requirements and additional
limitations on the use of funds on deposit in bank or brokerage accounts, as
well as lower earnings, can reduce the amount of funds available to meet the
obligations of Group Inc., including under the FRB’s source of strength
requirement, and even require Group Inc. to provide additional funding to such
subsidiaries. Restrictions or regulatory action of that kind could impede
access to funds that Group Inc. needs to make payments on its obligations,
including debt obligations, or dividend payments. In addition, Group Inc.’s
right to participate in a distribution of assets upon a subsidiary’s
liquidation or reorganization is subject to the prior claims of the
subsidiary’s creditors.

There has been a trend towards increased regulation and supervision of our
subsidiaries by the governments and regulators in the countries in which those
subsidiaries are located or do business. Concerns about protecting clients and
creditors of financial institutions that are controlled by persons or entities
located outside of the country in which such entities are located or do
business have caused or may cause a number of governments and regulators to
take additional steps to “ring fence” or require internal total loss-absorbing
capacity (which may also be subject to

“bail-in”

powers, as described below) at those entities in order to protect clients and
creditors of those entities in the event of financial difficulties involving
those entities. The result has been and may continue to be additional
limitations on our ability to efficiently move capital and liquidity among our
affiliated entities, or to Group Inc., including in times of liquidity stress,
thereby increasing the overall level of capital and liquidity required by us
on a consolidated basis.

Furthermore, Group Inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of certain of
its subsidiaries, including GS&Co. and GS Bank USA, subject to certain
exceptions. In addition, Group Inc. guarantees many of the obligations of its
other consolidated subsidiaries on a

transaction-by-transaction

basis, as negotiated with counterparties. These guarantees may require Group
Inc. to provide substantial funds or assets to its subsidiaries or their
creditors or counterparties at a time when Group Inc. is in need of liquidity
to fund its own obligations.

The requirements for us and certain of our subsidiaries to develop and submit
recovery and resolution plans to regulators, and the incorporation of feedback
received from regulators, may require us to increase capital or liquidity
levels or issue additional long-term debt at Group Inc. or particular
subsidiaries or otherwise incur additional or duplicative operational or other
costs at multiple entities, and may reduce our ability to provide Group Inc.
guarantees of the obligations of our subsidiaries or raise debt at Group Inc.
Resolution planning may also impair our ability to structure our intercompany
and external activities in a manner that we may otherwise deem most
operationally efficient. Furthermore, arrangements to facilitate our
resolution planning may cause us to be subject to additional taxes. Any such
limitations or requirements would be in addition to the legal and regulatory
restrictions described above on our ability to engage in capital actions or
make intercompany dividends or payments.

See “Business — Regulation” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about regulatory restrictions.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Credit

Our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely affected by
deterioration in the credit quality of or defaults by third parties.

We are exposed to the risk that third parties that owe us money, securities or
other assets will not perform their obligations. These parties may default on
their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational
failure or other reasons. A failure of a significant market participant, or
even concerns about a default by such an institution, could lead to
significant liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other institutions,
which in turn could adversely affect us.

We are also subject to the risk that our rights against third parties may not
be enforceable in all circumstances. In addition, deterioration in the credit
quality of third parties whose securities or obligations we hold, including a
deterioration in the value of collateral posted by third parties to secure
their obligations to us under derivative contracts and loan agreements, could
result in losses and/or adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or
otherwise use those securities or obligations for liquidity purposes.

A significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our counterparties could also
have a negative impact on our results. While in many cases we are permitted to
require additional collateral from counterparties that experience financial
difficulty, disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we are entitled
to receive and the value of pledged assets. The termination of contracts and
the foreclosure on collateral may subject us to claims for the improper
exercise of our rights. Default rates, downgrades and disputes with
counterparties as to the valuation of collateral typically increase
significantly in times of market stress, increased volatility and illiquidity.

As part of our clearing and prime brokerage activities, we finance our
clients’ positions, and we could be held responsible for the defaults or
misconduct of our clients. Although we have limits and regularly review credit
exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific industries,
countries and regions that we believe may present credit concerns, default
risk may arise from events or circumstances that are difficult to detect or
foresee.

Concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, underwriting, investing and financing activities.

Concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, underwriting, investing and financing activities. The number
and size of these transactions has affected and may in the future affect our
results of operations in a given period. Moreover, because of concentrated
risk, we may suffer losses even when economic and market conditions are
generally favorable for our competitors. Disruptions in the credit markets can
make it difficult to hedge these credit exposures effectively or economically.
In addition, we extend large commitments as part of our credit origination
activities.

Rules adopted under the Dodd-Frank Act, and similar rules adopted in other
jurisdictions, require issuers of certain asset-backed securities and any
person who organizes and initiates certain asset-backed securities
transactions to retain economic exposure to the asset, which has affected the
cost of and structures used in connection with these securitization
activities. Our inability to reduce our credit risk by selling, syndicating or
securitizing these positions, including during periods of market stress, could
negatively affect our results of operations due to a decrease in the fair
value of the positions, including due to the insolvency or bankruptcy of
borrowers, as well as the loss of revenues associated with selling such
securities or loans.

In the ordinary course of business, we may be subject to a concentration of
credit risk to a particular counterparty, borrower, issuer (including
sovereign issuers) or geographic area or group of related countries, such as
the E.U., and a failure or downgrade of, or default by, such entity could
negatively impact our businesses, perhaps materially, and the systems by which
we set limits and monitor the level of our credit exposure to individual
entities, industries, countries and regions may not function as we have
anticipated. Regulatory reform, including the Dodd-Frank Act, has led to
increased centralization of trading activity through particular clearing
houses, central agents or exchanges, which has significantly increased our
concentration of risk with respect to these entities. While our activities
expose us to many different industries, counterparties and countries, we
routinely execute a high volume of transactions with counterparties engaged in
financial services activities, including brokers and dealers, commercial
banks, clearing houses, exchanges and investment funds. This has resulted in
significant credit concentration with respect to these counterparties.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Derivative transactions and delayed documentation or settlements may expose us
to credit risk, unexpected risks and potential losses.

We are party to a large number of derivative transactions, including credit
derivatives. Many of these derivative instruments are individually negotiated
and

non-standardized,

which can make exiting, transferring or settling positions difficult. Many
credit derivatives require that we deliver to the counterparty the underlying
security, loan or other obligation in order to receive payment. In a number of
cases, we do not hold the underlying security, loan or other obligation and
may not be able to obtain the underlying security, loan or other obligation.
This could cause us to forfeit the payments due to us under these contracts or
result in settlement delays with the attendant credit and operational risk, as
well as increased costs to us.

Derivative transactions may also involve the risk that documentation has not
been properly executed, that executed agreements may not be enforceable
against the counterparty, or that obligations under such agreements may not be
able to be “netted” against other obligations with such counterparty. In
addition, counterparties may claim that such transactions were not appropriate
or authorized.

As a signatory to the ISDA Universal Protocol or U.S. ISDA Protocol (ISDA
Protocols) and being subject to the FRB’s and FDIC’s rules on QFCs and similar
rules in other jurisdictions, we may not be able to exercise remedies against
counterparties and, as this new regime has not yet been tested, we may suffer
risks or losses that we would not have expected to suffer if we could
immediately close out transactions upon a termination event. The ISDA
Protocols and these rules and regulations extend to repurchase agreements and
other instruments that are not derivative contracts.

Derivative contracts and other transactions, including secondary bank loan
purchases and sales, entered into with third parties are not always confirmed
by the counterparties or settled on a timely basis. While the transaction
remains unconfirmed or during any delay in settlement, we are subject to
heightened credit and operational risk and in the event of a default may find
it more difficult to enforce our rights.

In addition, as new complex derivative products are created, covering a wider
array of underlying credit and other instruments, disputes about the terms of
the underlying contracts could arise, which could impair our ability to
effectively manage our risk exposures from these products and subject us to
increased costs. The provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act requiring central
clearing of credit derivatives and other OTC derivatives, or a market shift
toward standardized derivatives, could reduce the risk associated with these
transactions, but under certain circumstances could also limit our ability to
develop derivatives that best suit the needs of our clients and to hedge our
own risks, and could adversely affect our profitability and has increased our
credit exposure to central clearing platforms.

Operational

A failure in our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third
parties, as well as human error, malfeasance or other misconduct, could impair
our liquidity, disrupt our businesses, result in the disclosure of
confidential information, damage our reputation and cause losses.

Our businesses are highly dependent on our ability to process and monitor, on
a daily basis, a very large number of transactions, many of which are highly
complex and occur at high volumes and frequencies, across numerous and diverse
markets in many currencies. These transactions, as well as the information
technology services we provide to clients, often must adhere to client-
specific guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory standards.

Many rules and regulations worldwide govern our obligations to execute
transactions and report such transactions and other information to regulators,
exchanges and investors. Compliance with these legal and reporting
requirements can be challenging, and we have been and may in the future be
subject to regulatory fines and penalties for failing to follow these rules or
to report timely, accurate and complete information in accordance with these
rules. As such requirements expand, compliance with these rules and
regulations has become more challenging.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

As our client base, including through our consumer businesses, and our
geographical reach expand and the volume, speed, frequency and complexity of
transactions, especially electronic transactions (as well as the requirements
to report such transactions on a real-time basis to clients, regulators and
exchanges) increase, developing and maintaining our operational systems and
infrastructure becomes more challenging, and the risk of systems or human
error in connection with such transactions increases, as well as the potential
consequences of such errors due to the speed and volume of transactions
involved and the potential difficulty associated with discovering errors
quickly enough to limit the resulting consequences. Such risks are exacerbated
in times of increased volatility. As with other similarly situated
institutions, we utilize credit underwriting models in connection with our
businesses, including our consumer-oriented activities. Allegations, whether
or not accurate, that the ultimate underwriting decisions do not treat
consumers or clients fairly, or comply with the applicable law or regulation,
can result in negative publicity, reputational damage and governmental and
regulatory scrutiny, investigations and enforcement actions.

Our financial, accounting, data processing or other operational systems and
facilities may fail to operate properly or become disabled as a result of
events that are wholly or partially beyond our control, such as a spike in
transaction volume, adversely affecting our ability to process these
transactions or provide these services. We must continuously update these
systems to support our operations and growth and to respond to changes in
regulations and markets, and invest heavily in systemic controls and training
to pursue our objective of ensuring that such transactions do not violate
applicable rules and regulations or, due to errors in processing such
transactions, adversely affect markets, our clients and counterparties or us.
Enhancements and updates to systems, as well as the requisite training,
including in connection with the integration of new businesses, entail
significant costs and create risks associated with implementing new systems
and integrating them with existing ones.

The use of computing devices and phones is critical to the work done by our
employees and the operation of our systems and businesses and those of our
clients and our third-party service providers and vendors. Their importance
has continued to increase, in particular in light of work-from-home
arrangements implemented in response to the

COVID-19

pandemic. Computers and computer networks are subject to various risks,
including, among others, cyber attacks, inherent technological defects, system
failures and human error. For example, fundamental security flaws in computer
chips found in many types of these computing devices and phones have been
reported in the past and may be discovered in the future. Cloud technologies
are also critical to the operation of our systems and platforms and our
reliance on cloud technologies is growing. Service disruptions have resulted,
and may result in the future, in delays in accessing, or the loss of, data
that is important to our businesses and may hinder our clients’ access to our
platforms. During 2021, there were a number of widely publicized cases of
outages in connection with access to cloud computing providers. Addressing
these and similar issues could be costly and affect the performance of these
businesses and systems. Operational risks may be incurred in applying fixes
and there may still be residual security risks.

Additionally, although the prevalence and scope of applications of distributed
ledger technology and similar technologies is growing, the technology is also
nascent and may be vulnerable to cyber attacks or have other inherent
weaknesses. We are exposed to risks, and may become exposed to additional
risks, related to distributed ledger technology, including through our
facilitation of clients’ activities involving financial products that use
distributed ledger technology, such as blockchain or cryptocurrencies, our
investments in companies that seek to develop platforms based on distributed
ledger technology, the use of distributed ledger technology by third-party
vendors, clients, counterparties, clearing houses and other financial
intermediaries, and the receipt of cryptocurrencies or other digital assets as
collateral.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notwithstanding the proliferation of technology and technology-based risk and
control systems, our businesses ultimately rely on people as our greatest
resource, and, from time to time, they have in the past and may in the future
make mistakes or engage in violations of applicable policies, laws, rules or
procedures that are not always caught immediately by our technological
processes or by our controls and other procedures, which are intended to
prevent and detect such errors or violations. These have in the past and may
in the future include calculation errors, mistakes in addressing emails,
errors in software or model development or implementation, or simple errors in
judgment, as well as intentional efforts to ignore or circumvent applicable
policies, laws, rules or procedures. Human errors, malfeasance and other
misconduct, including the intentional misuse of client information in
connection with insider trading or for other purposes, even if promptly
discovered and remediated, has in the past and may in the future result in
reputational damage and losses and liabilities for us.

In addition, we face the risk of operational failure or significant
operational delay, termination or capacity constraints of any of the clearing
agents, exchanges, clearing houses or other financial intermediaries we use to
facilitate our securities and derivatives transactions, and as our
interconnectivity with our clients grows, we increasingly face the risk of
operational failure or significant operational delay with respect to our
clients’ systems.

There has been significant consolidation among clearing agents, exchanges and
clearing houses and an increasing number of derivative transactions are
cleared on exchanges, which has increased our exposure to operational failure
or significant operational delay, termination or capacity constraints of the
particular financial intermediaries that we use and could affect our ability
to find adequate and cost-effective alternatives in the event of any such
failure, delay, termination or constraint. Industry consolidation, whether
among market participants or financial intermediaries, increases the risk of
operational failure or significant operational delay as disparate complex
systems need to be integrated, often on an accelerated basis.

The interconnectivity of multiple financial institutions with central agents,
exchanges and clearing houses, and the increased centrality of these entities,
increases the risk that an operational failure at one institution or entity
may cause an industry-wide operational failure that could materially impact
our ability to conduct business. Interconnectivity of financial institutions
with other companies through, among other things, application programming
interfaces or APIs presents similar risks. Any such failure, termination or
constraint could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions, service
our clients, manage our exposure to risk or expand our businesses or result in
financial loss or liability to our clients, impairment of our liquidity,
disruption of our businesses, regulatory intervention or reputational damage.

Despite our resiliency plans and facilities, our ability to conduct business
may be adversely impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that supports
our businesses and the communities where we are located. This may include a
disruption involving electrical, satellite, undersea cable or other
communications, internet, transportation or other facilities used by us, our
employees or third parties with which we conduct business, including cloud
service providers. These disruptions may occur as a result of events that
affect only our buildings or systems or those of such third parties, or as a
result of events with a broader impact globally, regionally or in the cities
where those buildings or systems are located, including, but not limited to,
natural disasters, war, civil unrest, terrorism, economic or political
developments, pandemics and weather events.

In addition, although we seek to diversify our third-party vendors to increase
our resiliency, we are also exposed to the risk that a disruption or other
information technology event at a common service provider to our vendors could
impede their ability to provide products or services to us, including in
connection with our new business initiatives. We may not be able to
effectively monitor or mitigate operational risks relating to our vendors’ use
of common service providers.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Aside from work-from-home arrangements during the

COVID-19

pandemic, nearly all of our employees in our primary locations, including the
New York metropolitan area, London, Bengaluru, Hong Kong, Tokyo and Salt Lake
City, work in close proximity to one another, in one or more buildings.
Notwithstanding our efforts to maintain business continuity, given that our
headquarters and the largest concentration of our employees are in the New
York metropolitan area, and our two principal office buildings in the New York
area both are located on the waterfront of the Hudson River, depending on the
intensity and longevity of the event, a catastrophic event impacting our New
York metropolitan area offices, including a terrorist attack, extreme weather
event or other hostile or catastrophic event, could negatively affect our
business. If a disruption occurs in one location and our employees in that
location are unable to occupy our offices or communicate with or travel to
other locations or successfully work remotely, our ability to service and
interact with our clients may suffer, and we may not be able to successfully
implement contingency plans that depend on communication, work-from-home
arrangements or travel.

A failure to protect our computer systems, networks and information, and our
clients’ information, against cyber attacks and similar threats could impair
our ability to conduct our businesses, result in the disclosure, theft or
destruction of confidential information, damage our reputation and cause
losses.

Our operations rely on the secure processing, storage and transmission of
confidential and other information in our computer systems and networks and
those of our vendors. There have been a number of highly publicized cases
involving financial services companies, consumer-based companies, software and
information technology service providers, governmental agencies and other
organizations reporting the unauthorized access or disclosure of client,
customer or other confidential information in recent years, as well as cyber
attacks involving the dissemination, theft and destruction of corporate
information or other assets, as a result of failure to follow procedures by
employees or contractors or as a result of actions by third parties, including
actions by foreign governments. There have also been several highly publicized
cases where hackers have requested “ransom” payments in exchange for not
disclosing customer information or for restoring access to information or
systems.

We are regularly the target of attempted cyber attacks, including

denial-of-service

attacks, and must continuously monitor and develop our systems to protect the
integrity and functionality of our technology infrastructure and access to and
the security of our data. We have faced an increasing number of attempted
cyber attacks as we expand our mobile- and other internet-based products and
services, as well as our usage of mobile and cloud technologies, and as we
provide more of these services to a greater number of individual consumers.
The increasing migration of our communication from devices we provide to
employee-owned devices presents additional risks of cyber attacks, as do work-
from-home arrangements such as those implemented in response to the

COVID-19

pandemic. In addition, due to our interconnectivity with third-party vendors
(and their respective service providers), central agents, exchanges, clearing
houses and other financial institutions, we could be adversely impacted if any
of them is subject to a successful cyber attack or other information security
event. These impacts could include the loss of access to information or
services from the third party subject to the cyber attack or other information
security event, which could, in turn, interrupt certain of our businesses.

Despite our efforts to ensure the integrity of our systems and information, we
may not be able to anticipate, detect or implement effective preventive
measures against all cyber threats, especially because the techniques used are
increasingly sophisticated, change frequently and are often not recognized
until launched. Cyber attacks can originate from a variety of sources,
including third parties who are affiliated with or sponsored by foreign
governments or are involved with organized crime or terrorist organizations.
Third parties may also attempt to place individuals in our offices or induce
employees, clients or other users of our systems to disclose sensitive
information or provide access to our data or that of our clients, and these
types of risks may be difficult to detect or prevent.

Although we take protective measures proactively and endeavor to modify them
as circumstances warrant, our computer systems, software and networks may be
vulnerable to unauthorized access, misuse, computer viruses or other malicious
code, cyber attacks on our vendors and other events that could have a security
impact. Risks relating to cyber attacks on our vendors have been increasing
given the greater frequency and severity in recent years of supply chain
attacks affecting software and information technology service providers. Due
to the complexity and interconnectedness of our systems, the process of
enhancing our protective measures can itself create a risk of systems
disruptions and security issues. In addition, protective measures that we
employ to compartmentalize our data may reduce our visibility into, and
adversely affect our ability to respond to, cyber threats and issues with our
systems.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

If one or more of such events occur, this potentially could jeopardize our or
our clients’ or counterparties’ confidential and other information processed,
stored in, or transmitted through our computer systems and networks, or
otherwise cause interruptions or malfunctions in our operations or those of
our clients, counterparties or third parties, which could impact their ability
to transact with us or otherwise result in legal or regulatory action,
significant losses or reputational damage. In addition, such an event could
persist for an extended period of time before being detected, and, following
detection, it could take considerable time for us to obtain full and reliable
information about the extent, amount and type of information compromised.
During the course of an investigation, we may not know the full impact of the
event and how to remediate it, and actions, decisions and mistakes that are
taken or made may further increase the negative effects of the event on our
business, results of operations and reputation.

We have expended, and expect to continue to expend, significant resources on
an ongoing basis to modify our protective measures and to investigate and
remediate vulnerabilities or other exposures, but these measures may be
ineffective and we may be subject to legal or regulatory action, as well as
financial losses that are either not insured against or not fully covered
through any insurance maintained by us.

Our clients’ confidential information may also be at risk from the compromise
of clients’ personal electronic devices or as a result of a data security
breach at an unrelated company. Losses due to unauthorized account activity
could harm our reputation and may have adverse effects on our business,
financial condition and results of operations.

The increased use of mobile and cloud technologies can heighten these and
other operational risks, as can work-from-home arrangements. Certain aspects
of the security of such technologies are unpredictable or beyond our control,
and the failure by mobile technology and cloud service providers to adequately
safeguard their systems and prevent cyber attacks could disrupt our operations
and result in misappropriation, corruption or loss of confidential and other
information. In addition, there is a risk that encryption and other protective
measures, despite their sophistication, may be defeated, particularly to the
extent that new computing technologies vastly increase the speed and computing
power available.

We routinely transmit and receive personal, confidential and proprietary
information by email and other electronic means. We have discussed and worked
with clients, vendors, service providers, counterparties and other third
parties to develop secure transmission capabilities and protect against cyber
attacks, but we do not have, and may be unable to put in place, secure
capabilities with all of our clients, vendors, service providers,
counterparties and other third parties and we may not be able to ensure that
these third parties have appropriate controls in place to protect the
confidentiality of the information. An interception, misuse or mishandling of
personal, confidential or proprietary information being sent to or received
from a client, vendor, service provider, counterparty or other third party
could result in legal liability, regulatory action and reputational harm.

We may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and
strategies.

We seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a risk and control
framework encompassing a variety of separate but complementary financial,
credit, operational, compliance and legal reporting systems, internal
controls, management review processes and other mechanisms. Our risk
management process seeks to balance our ability to profit from market-making,
investing or lending positions, and underwriting activities, with our exposure
to potential losses. While we employ a broad and diversified set of risk
monitoring and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques and the judgments
that accompany their application cannot anticipate every economic and
financial outcome or the specifics and timing of such outcomes. Thus, in the
course of our activities, we have incurred and may in the future incur losses.
Market conditions in recent years have involved unprecedented dislocations and
highlight the limitations inherent in using historical data to manage risk.

The models that we use to assess and control our risk exposures reflect
assumptions about the degrees of correlation or lack thereof among prices of
various asset classes or other market indicators. In times of market stress or
other unforeseen circumstances, previously uncorrelated indicators may become
correlated, or conversely previously correlated indicators may move in
different directions. These types of market movements have at times limited
the effectiveness of our hedging strategies and have caused us to incur
significant losses, and they may do so in the future. These changes in
correlation have been and may in the future be exacerbated where other market
participants are using risk or trading models with assumptions or algorithms
that are similar to ours. In these and other cases, it may be difficult to
reduce our risk positions due to the activity of other market participants or
widespread market dislocations, including circumstances where asset values are
declining significantly or no market exists for certain assets.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

In addition, the use of models in connection with risk management and numerous
other critical activities presents risks that such models may be ineffective,
either because of poor design, ineffective testing, or improper or flawed
inputs, as well as unpermitted access to such models resulting in unapproved
or malicious changes to the model or its inputs.

To the extent that we have positions through our market-making or origination
activities or we make investments directly through our investing activities,
including private equity, that do not have an established liquid trading
market or are otherwise subject to restrictions on sale or hedging, we may not
be able to reduce our positions and therefore reduce our risk associated with
those positions. In addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law and
regulation, we invest our own capital in private equity, credit, real estate
and hedge funds that we manage and limitations on our ability to withdraw some
or all of our investments in these funds, whether for legal, reputational or
other reasons, may make it more difficult for us to control the risk exposures
relating to these investments.

Prudent risk management, as well as regulatory restrictions, may cause us to
limit our exposure to counterparties, geographic areas or markets, which may
limit our business opportunities and increase the cost of our funding or
hedging activities.

As we have expanded and intend to continue to expand the product and
geographic scope of our offerings of credit products to consumers, we are
presented with different credit risks and must expand and adapt our credit
risk monitoring and mitigation activities to account for these business
activities. A failure to adequately assess and control such risk exposures
could result in losses to us.

For further information about our risk management policies and procedures, see
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations — Risk Management” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K.

We may incur losses as a result of unforeseen or catastrophic events,
including pandemics, terrorist attacks, extreme weather events or other
natural disasters.

The occurrence of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including pandemics, such
as

COVID-19,

or other widespread health emergencies (or concerns over the possibility of
such an emergency), terrorist attacks, extreme weather events, solar events or
other natural disasters, could create economic and financial disruptions, and
could lead to operational difficulties (including travel limitations and
limitations on occupancy in our offices) that could impair our ability to
manage our businesses.

Climate change could disrupt our businesses and adversely affect client
activity levels and the creditworthiness of our clients and counterparties,
and our efforts to address concerns relating to climate change could result in
damage to our reputation.

Climate change may cause extreme weather events that disrupt operations at one
or more of our primary locations, which may negatively affect our ability to
service and interact with our clients, adversely affect the value of our
investments, including our real estate investments, and reduce the
availability or increase the cost of insurance. Climate change and the
transition to a less carbon-dependent economy may also have a negative impact
on the operations or financial condition of our clients and counterparties,
which may decrease revenues from those clients and counterparties and increase
the credit risk associated with loans and other credit exposures to those
clients and counterparties. In addition, climate change may impact the broader
economy.

We are also exposed to risks resulting from changes in public policy, laws and
regulations, or market and public perceptions and preferences in connection
with the transition to a less carbon-dependent economy. These changes could
adversely affect our business, results of operations and reputation. For
example, our reputation and client relationships may be damaged as a result of
our involvement, or our clients’ involvement, in certain industries or
projects associated with causing or exacerbating climate change, as well as
any decisions we make to continue to conduct or change our activities in
response to considerations relating to climate change. If we are unable to
achieve our objectives relating to climate change or our response to climate
change is perceived to be ineffective or insufficient, our business,
reputation and efforts to recruit and retain employees may suffer.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

New regulations or guidance relating to climate change, as well as the
perspectives of regulators, shareholders, employees and other stakeholders
regarding climate change, may affect whether and on what terms and conditions
we engage in certain activities or offer certain products. Federal and state,
and

non-U.S.

banking regulators and supervisory authorities, shareholders and other
stakeholders have increasingly viewed financial institutions as playing an
important role in helping to address risks related to climate change, both
directly and with respect to their clients, which may result in financial
institutions coming under increased requirements and expectations regarding
the disclosure and management of their climate risks and related lending,
investment and advisory activities. We also may become subject to new or
heightened regulatory requirements relating to climate change, such as
requirements relating to operational resiliency or stress testing for various
climate stress scenarios. Any such new or heightened requirements could result
in increased regulatory, compliance or other costs or higher capital
requirements. The risks associated with, and the perspective of regulators,
shareholders, employees and other stakeholders regarding, climate change are
continuing to evolve rapidly, which can make it difficult to assess the
ultimate impact on us of climate change-related risks and uncertainties, and
we expect that climate change-related risks will increase over time.

Legal and Regulatory

Our businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive
regulation around the world.

As a participant in the financial services industry and a systemically
important financial institution, we are subject to extensive regulation in
jurisdictions around the world. We face the risk of significant intervention
by law enforcement, regulatory and taxing authorities, as well as private
litigation, in all jurisdictions in which we conduct our businesses. In many
cases, our activities have been and may continue to be subject to overlapping
and divergent regulation in different jurisdictions. Among other things, as a
result of law enforcement authorities, regulators or private parties
challenging our compliance with existing laws and regulations, we or our
employees have been, and could be, fined, criminally charged or sanctioned;
prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities; subjected to
limitations or conditions on our business activities, including higher capital
requirements; or subjected to new or substantially higher taxes or other
governmental charges in connection with the conduct of our businesses or with
respect to our employees. These limitations or conditions may limit our
business activities and negatively impact our profitability.

In addition to the impact on the scope and profitability of our business
activities,

day-to-day

compliance with existing laws and regulations has involved and will continue
to involve significant amounts of time, including that of our senior leaders
and that of a large number of dedicated compliance and other reporting and
operational personnel, all of which may negatively impact our profitability.

Our revenues and profitability and those of our competitors have been and will
continue to be impacted by requirements relating to capital, additional loss-
absorbing capacity, leverage, minimum liquidity and long-term funding levels,
requirements related to resolution and recovery planning, derivatives clearing
and margin rules and levels of regulatory oversight, as well as limitations on
which and, if permitted, how certain business activities may be carried out by
financial institutions. The laws and regulations that apply to our businesses
are often complex and, in many cases, we must make interpretive decisions
regarding the application of those laws and regulations to our business
activities. Changes in interpretations, whether in response to regulatory
guidance, industry conventions, our own reassessments or otherwise, could
adversely affect our businesses, results of operations or ability to satisfy
applicable regulatory requirements, such as capital or liquidity requirements.

If there are new laws or regulations or changes in the interpretation or
enforcement of existing laws or regulations applicable to our businesses or
those of our clients, including capital, liquidity, leverage, long-term debt,
total loss-absorbing capacity and margin requirements, restrictions on
leveraged lending or other business practices, reporting requirements,
requirements relating to recovery and resolution planning, tax burdens and
compensation restrictions, that are imposed on a limited subset of financial
institutions (whether based on size, method of funding, activities, geography
or other criteria), compliance with these new laws or regulations, or changes
in the enforcement of existing laws or regulations, could adversely affect our
ability to compete effectively with other institutions that are not affected
in the same way. In addition, regulation imposed on financial institutions or
market participants generally, such as taxes on stock transfers and other
financial transactions, could adversely impact levels of market activity more
broadly, and thus impact our businesses. Changes to laws or regulations, such
as tax laws, could also have a disproportionate impact on us, based on the way
those laws or regulations are applied to financial services and financial
firms or due to our corporate structure.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

These developments could impact our profitability in the affected
jurisdictions, or even make it uneconomic for us to continue to conduct all or
certain of our businesses in those jurisdictions, or could cause us to incur
significant costs associated with changing our business practices,
restructuring our businesses, moving all or certain of our businesses and our
employees to other locations or complying with applicable capital
requirements, including reducing dividends or share repurchases, liquidating
assets or raising capital in a manner that adversely increases our funding
costs or otherwise adversely affects our shareholders and creditors.

U.S. and

non-U.S.

regulatory developments, in particular the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III, have
significantly altered the regulatory framework within which we operate and
have adversely affected and may in the future adversely affect our
profitability. Among the aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act that have affected or
may in the future affect our businesses are: increased capital, liquidity and
reporting requirements; limitations on activities in which we may engage;
increased regulation of and restrictions on OTC derivatives markets and
transactions; limitations on incentive compensation; limitations on affiliate
transactions; requirements to reorganize or limit activities in connection
with recovery and resolution planning; increased deposit insurance
assessments; and increased standards of care for broker-dealers and investment
advisers in dealing with clients. The implementation of higher capital
requirements, more stringent requirements relating to liquidity, long-term
debt and total loss-absorbing capacity and the prohibition on proprietary
trading and the sponsorship of, or investment in, covered funds by the Volcker
Rule may continue to adversely affect our profitability and competitive
position, particularly if these requirements do not apply equally to our
competitors or are not implemented uniformly across jurisdictions. We may also
become subject to higher and more stringent capital and other regulatory
requirements as a result of the implementation of Basel Committee standards,
including the new credit and operational risk capital standards published in
December 2017 and the new market risk capital standard published in January

As described in “Business — Regulation — Banking Supervision and Regulation”
in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K,

the SCB has replaced the capital conservation buffer under the Standardized
Capital Rules and resulted in higher Standardized capital ratio requirements.
Failure to comply with these requirements could limit our ability to, among
other things, repurchase shares, pay dividends and make certain discretionary
compensation payments. In addition, if, as in 2020, we are required to
resubmit our capital plan, we generally may not make capital distributions,
such as share repurchases or dividends, without the prior approval of the FRB.
Dividends and repurchases are also subject to oversight by the FRB, which can
result in limitations. Limitations on our ability to make capital
distributions could, among other things, prevent us from returning capital to
our shareholders and impact our return on equity. Additionally, as a

G-SIB,

we are subject to the

G-SIB

surcharge. Our

G-SIB

surcharge is updated annually based on financial data from the prior year.
Expansion of our businesses, growth in our balance sheet and increased
reliance on short-term wholesale funding have resulted in increases and in the
future may result in further increases in our

G-SIB

surcharge and a corresponding increase in our capital requirements.

We are also subject to laws and regulations, such as the GDPR and the
California Consumer Privacy Act, relating to the privacy of the information of
clients, employees or others, and any failure to comply with these laws and
regulations could expose us to liability and/or reputational damage. As new
privacy-related laws and regulations are implemented, the time and resources
needed for us to comply with such laws and regulations, as well as our
potential liability for

non-compliance

and reporting obligations in the case of data breaches, may significantly
increase.

In addition, our businesses are increasingly subject to laws and regulations
relating to surveillance, encryption and data

on-shoring

in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Compliance with these laws and
regulations may require us to change our policies, procedures and technology
for information security, which could, among other things, make us more
vulnerable to cyber attacks and misappropriation, corruption or loss of
information or technology.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

We have entered into consumer-oriented deposit-taking, lending and credit card
businesses, and we expect to expand the product and geographic scope of our
offerings. Entering into these businesses subjects us to numerous additional
regulations in the jurisdictions in which these businesses operate. Not only
are these regulations extensive, but they involve types of regulations and
supervision, as well as regulatory compliance risks, that have not
historically applied to us. The level of regulatory scrutiny and the scope of
regulations affecting financial interactions with consumers is often much
greater than that associated with doing business with institutions and

high-net-worth

individuals. Complying with these regulations is time-consuming, costly and
presents new and increased risks.

Increasingly, regulators and courts have sought to hold financial institutions
liable for the misconduct of their clients where they have determined that the
financial institution should have detected that the client was engaged in
wrongdoing, even though the financial institution had no direct knowledge of
the activities engaged in by its client. Regulators and courts have also
increasingly found liability as a “control person” for activities of entities
in which financial institutions or funds controlled by financial institutions
have an investment, but which they do not actively manage. In addition,
regulators and courts continue to seek to establish “fiduciary” obligations to
counterparties to which no such duty had been assumed to exist. To the extent
that such efforts are successful, the cost of, and liabilities associated
with, engaging in brokerage, clearing, market-making, prime brokerage,
investing and other similar activities could increase significantly. To the
extent that we have fiduciary obligations in connection with acting as a
financial adviser or investment adviser or in other roles for individual,
institutional, sovereign or investment fund clients, any breach, or even an
alleged breach, of such obligations could have materially negative legal,
regulatory and reputational consequences.

For information about the extensive regulation to which our businesses are
subject, see “Business — Regulation” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K.

A failure to appropriately identify and address potential conflicts of
interest could adversely affect our businesses.

Due to the broad scope of our businesses and our client base, we regularly
address potential conflicts of interest, including situations where our
services to a particular client or our own investments or other interests
conflict, or are perceived to conflict, with the interests of that client or
another client, as well as situations where one or more of our businesses have
access to material

non-public

information that may not be shared with our other businesses and situations
where we may be a creditor of an entity with which we also have an advisory or
other relationship.

In addition, our status as a BHC subjects us to heightened regulation and
increased regulatory scrutiny by the FRB with respect to transactions between
GS Bank USA and its subsidiaries and entities that are or could be viewed as
affiliates of ours and, under the Volcker Rule, transactions between us and
covered funds.

We have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to identify and
address conflicts of interest, including those designed to prevent the
improper sharing of information among our businesses. However, appropriately
identifying and dealing with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult,
and our reputation, which is one of our most important assets, could be
damaged and the willingness of clients to enter into transactions with us may
be adversely affected if we fail, or appear to fail, to identify, disclose and
deal appropriately with conflicts of interest. In addition, potential or
perceived conflicts could give rise to litigation or regulatory enforcement
actions. Additionally, our

One Goldman Sachs

initiative aims to increase collaboration among our businesses, which may
increase the potential for actual or perceived conflicts of interest and
improper information sharing.

We may be adversely affected by increased governmental and regulatory scrutiny
or negative publicity.

Governmental scrutiny from regulators, legislative bodies and law enforcement
agencies with respect to matters relating to compensation, our business
practices, our past actions and other matters remains at high levels.
Political and public sentiment regarding financial institutions has in the
past and may in the future result in a significant amount of adverse press
coverage, as well as adverse statements or charges by regulators or other
government officials. Press coverage and other public statements that assert
some form of wrongdoing (including, in some cases, press coverage and public
statements that do not directly involve us) often result in some type of
investigation by regulators, legislators and law enforcement officials or in
lawsuits.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Responding to these investigations and lawsuits, regardless of the ultimate
outcome of the proceeding, is time-consuming and expensive and can divert the
time and effort of our senior management from our business. Penalties and
fines sought by regulatory authorities have increased substantially and
certain regulators have been more likely in recent years to commence
enforcement actions or to support legislation targeted at the financial
services industry. Governmental authorities may also be more likely to pursue
criminal or other actions, including seeking admissions of wrongdoing or
guilty pleas, in connection with the resolution of an inquiry or investigation
to the extent a company is viewed as having previously engaged in criminal,
regulatory or other misconduct. Adverse publicity, governmental scrutiny and
legal and enforcement proceedings can also have a negative impact on our
reputation and on the morale and performance of our employees, which could
adversely affect our businesses and results of operations.

The financial services industry generally and our businesses in particular
have been subject to negative publicity. Our reputation and businesses may be
adversely affected by negative publicity or information regarding our
businesses and personnel, whether or not accurate or true, that may be posted
on social media or other internet forums or published by news organizations.
Postings on these types of forums may also adversely impact risk positions of
our clients and other parties that owe us money, securities or other assets
and increase the chance that they will not perform their obligations to us or
reduce the revenues we receive from their use of our services. The speed and
pervasiveness with which information can be disseminated through these
channels, in particular social media, may magnify risks relating to negative
publicity.

Substantial civil or criminal liability or significant regulatory action
against us could have material adverse financial effects or cause us
significant reputational harm, which in turn could seriously harm our business
prospects.

We face significant legal risks in our businesses, and the volume of claims
and amount of damages and penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory
proceedings against financial institutions remain high. See Notes 18 and 27 to
the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this

Form 10-K

for information about certain of our legal and regulatory proceedings and
investigations. We have seen legal claims by consumers and clients increase in
a market downturn and employment-related claims increase following periods in
which we have reduced our headcount. Additionally, governmental entities have
been plaintiffs and are parties in certain of our legal proceedings, and we
may face future civil or criminal actions or claims by the same or other
governmental entities, as well as

follow-on

civil litigation that is often commenced after regulatory settlements.

Significant settlements by several large financial institutions, including, in
some cases, us, with governmental entities have been publicly announced. The
trend of large settlements with governmental entities may adversely affect the
outcomes for other financial institutions in similar actions, especially where
governmental officials have announced that the large settlements will be used
as the basis or a template for other settlements. The uncertain regulatory
enforcement environment makes it difficult to estimate probable losses, which
can lead to substantial disparities between legal reserves and subsequent
actual settlements or penalties.

Claims of collusion or anti-competitive conduct have become more common. Civil
cases have been brought against financial institutions (including us) alleging

bid-rigging,

group boycotts or other anti-competitive practices. Antitrust laws generally
provide for joint and several liability and treble damages. These claims have
resulted in significant settlements in the past and may do so in the future.

We are subject to laws and regulations worldwide, including the FCPA and the
U.K. Bribery Act, relating to corrupt and illegal payments to, and hiring
practices with regard to, government officials and others. Violation of these
or similar laws and regulations have in the past resulted in and could in the
future result in significant monetary penalties. Such violations could also
result in severe restrictions on our activities and damage to our reputation.

Certain law enforcement authorities have recently required admissions of
wrongdoing, and, in some cases, criminal pleas, as part of the resolutions of
matters brought against financial institutions or their employees. See for
example, “1MDB-Related Matters” in Note 27 to the consolidated financial
statements in Part II, Item 8 of this

Form 10-K.

Any such resolution of a criminal matter involving us or our employees could
lead to increased exposure to civil litigation, could adversely affect our
reputation, could result in penalties or limitations on our ability to conduct
our activities generally or in certain circumstances and could have other
negative effects. Further, as a result of the 1MDB settlement, we are no
longer a “well-known seasoned issuer,” which places limitations on the manner
in which we can market our securities.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

In conducting our businesses around the world, we are subject to political,
legal, regulatory and other risks that are inherent in operating in many
countries.

In conducting our businesses and supporting our global operations, we are
subject to risks of possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls,
capital controls, exchange controls, communications and other content
restrictions, and other restrictive governmental actions. For example,
sanctions have been imposed by the U.S. and the E.U. on certain individuals
and companies in Russia and Venezuela. In many countries, the laws and
regulations applicable to the securities and financial services industries and
many of the transactions in which we are involved are uncertain and evolving,
and it may be difficult for us to determine the exact requirements of local
laws in every market. We have been in some cases subject to divergent and
conflicting laws and regulations across markets, and we are increasingly
subject to the risk that the jurisdictions in which we operate may implement
laws and regulations that directly conflict with those of another
jurisdiction. Any determination by local regulators that we have not acted in
compliance with the application of local laws in a particular market or our
failure to develop effective working relationships with local regulators could
have a significant and negative effect not only on our businesses in that
market, but also on our reputation generally. Further, in some jurisdictions a
failure, or alleged failure, to comply with laws and regulations has subjected
and may in the future subject us and our personnel not only to civil actions,
but also criminal actions and other sanctions. We are also subject to the
enhanced risk that transactions we structure might not be legally enforceable
in all cases.

While business and other practices throughout the world differ, our principal
entities are subject in their operations worldwide to rules and regulations
relating to corrupt and illegal payments, hiring practices and money
laundering, as well as laws relating to doing business with certain
individuals, groups and countries, such as the FCPA, the BSA and the U.K.
Bribery Act. While we have invested and continue to invest significant
resources in training and in compliance monitoring, the geographical diversity
of our operations, employees, clients and consumers, as well as the vendors
and other third parties that we deal with, greatly increases the risk that we
may be found in violation of such rules or regulations and any such violation
could subject us to significant penalties or adversely affect our reputation.
See for example, “1MDB-Related Matters” in Note 27 to the consolidated
financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this

Form 10-K.

In addition, there have been a number of highly publicized cases around the
world, involving actual or alleged fraud or other misconduct by employees in
the financial services industry, and we have had and may in the future have
employee misconduct. This misconduct has included and may also in the future
include intentional efforts to ignore or circumvent applicable policies, rules
or procedures or misappropriation of funds and the theft of proprietary
information, including proprietary software. It is not always possible to
deter or prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we take to prevent
and detect this activity have not been and may not be effective in all cases,
as reflected by the settlements relating to 1MDB.

The application of regulatory strategies and requirements in the U.S. and

non-U.S.

jurisdictions to facilitate the orderly resolution of large financial
institutions could create greater risk of loss for Group Inc.’s security
holders.

As described in “Business — Regulation — Banking Supervision and Regulation —
Insolvency of an IDI or a BHC,” if the FDIC is appointed as receiver under
OLA, the rights of Group Inc.’s creditors would be determined under OLA, and
substantial differences exist in the rights of creditors between OLA and the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code, including the right of the FDIC under OLA to disregard
the strict priority of creditor claims in some circumstances, which could have
a material adverse effect on our debtholders.

The FDIC has announced that a single point of entry strategy may be a
desirable strategy under OLA to resolve a large financial institution in a
manner that would, among other things, impose losses on shareholders,
debtholders and other creditors of the

top-tier

BHC (in our case, Group Inc.), while the BHC’s subsidiaries may continue to
operate. It is possible that the application of the single point of entry
strategy under OLA, in which Group Inc. would be the only entity to enter
resolution proceedings (and its material broker-dealer, bank and other
operating entities would not enter resolution proceedings), would result in
greater losses to Group Inc.’s security holders (including holders of our
fixed rate, floating rate and indexed debt securities), than the losses that
would result from the application of a bankruptcy proceeding or a different
resolution strategy, such as a multiple point of entry resolution strategy for
Group Inc. and certain of its material subsidiaries.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Assuming Group Inc. entered resolution proceedings and that support from Group
Inc. or other available resources to its subsidiaries was sufficient to enable
the subsidiaries to remain solvent, losses at the subsidiary level would be
transferred to Group Inc. and ultimately borne by Group Inc.’s security
holders, third-party creditors of Group Inc.’s subsidiaries would receive full
recoveries on their claims, and Group Inc.’s security holders (including our
shareholders, debtholders and other unsecured creditors) could face
significant and possibly complete losses. In that case, Group Inc.’s security
holders would face losses while the third-party creditors of Group Inc.’s
subsidiaries would incur no losses because the subsidiaries would continue to
operate and would not enter resolution or bankruptcy proceedings. In addition,
holders of Group Inc.’s eligible long-term debt and holders of Group Inc.’s
other debt securities could face losses ahead of its other similarly situated
creditors in a resolution under OLA if the FDIC exercised its right, described
above, to disregard the priority of creditor claims.

OLA also provides the FDIC with authority to cause creditors and shareholders
of the financial company in receivership to bear losses before taxpayers are
exposed to such losses, and amounts owed to the U.S. government would
generally receive a statutory payment priority over the claims of private
creditors, including senior creditors.

In addition, under OLA, claims of creditors (including debtholders) could be
satisfied through the issuance of equity or other securities in a bridge
entity to which Group Inc.’s assets are transferred. If such a

securities-for-claims

exchange were implemented, there can be no assurance that the value of the
securities of the bridge entity would be sufficient to repay or satisfy all or
any part of the creditor claims for which the securities were exchanged. While
the FDIC has issued regulations to implement OLA, not all aspects of how the
FDIC might exercise this authority are known and additional rulemaking is
possible.

In addition, certain jurisdictions, including the U.K. and the E.U., have
implemented resolution regimes to provide resolution authorities with the
ability to recapitalize a failing entity by writing down its unsecured debt or
converting its unsecured debt into equity. Such

“bail-in”

powers are intended to enable the recapitalization of a failing institution by
allocating losses to its shareholders and unsecured debtholders. For example,
the Bank of England requires a certain amount of intercompany funding that we
provide to our material U.K. subsidiaries to contain a contractual trigger to
expressly permit the Bank of England to exercise such

“bail-in”

powers in certain circumstances. If the intercompany funding we provide to our
subsidiaries is “bailed in,” Group Inc.’s claims on its subsidiaries would be
subordinated to the claims of the subsidiaries’ third-party creditors or
written down. U.S. regulators are considering and

non-U.S.

authorities have adopted requirements that certain subsidiaries of large
financial institutions maintain minimum amounts of total loss-absorbing
capacity that would pass losses up from the subsidiaries to the

top-tier

BHC and, ultimately, to security holders of the

top-tier

BHC in the event of failure.

The application of Group Inc.’s proposed resolution strategy could result in
greater losses for Group Inc.’s security holders.

In our resolution plan, Group Inc. would be resolved under the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code. The strategy described in our resolution plan is a variant of the single
point of entry strategy: Group Inc. and Goldman Sachs Funding LLC (Funding
IHC), a wholly-owned, direct subsidiary of Group Inc., would recapitalize and
provide liquidity to certain major subsidiaries, including through the
forgiveness of intercompany indebtedness, the extension of the maturities of
intercompany indebtedness and the extension of additional intercompany loans.
If this strategy were successful, creditors of some or all of Group Inc.’s
major subsidiaries would receive full recoveries on their claims, while Group
Inc.’s security holders could face significant and possibly complete losses.

To facilitate the execution of our resolution plan, we formed Funding IHC. In
exchange for an unsecured subordinated funding note and equity interest, Group
Inc. transferred certain intercompany receivables and substantially all of its
GCLA to Funding IHC, and agreed to transfer additional GCLA above prescribed
thresholds.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

We also put in place a Capital and Liquidity Support Agreement (CLSA) among
Group Inc., Funding IHC and our major subsidiaries. Under the CLSA, Funding
IHC has provided Group Inc. with a committed line of credit that allows Group
Inc. to draw sufficient funds to meet its cash needs during the ordinary
course of business. In addition, if our financial resources deteriorate so
severely that resolution may be imminent, (i) the committed line of credit
will automatically terminate and the unsecured subordinated funding note will
automatically be forgiven, (ii) all intercompany receivables owed by the major
subsidiaries to Group Inc. will be transferred to Funding IHC or their
maturities will be extended to five years, (iii) Group Inc. will be obligated
to transfer substantially all of its remaining intercompany receivables and
GCLA (other than an amount to fund anticipated bankruptcy expenses) to Funding
IHC, and (iv) Funding IHC will be obligated to provide capital and liquidity
support to the major subsidiaries. Group Inc.’s and Funding IHC’s obligations
under the CLSA are secured pursuant to a related security agreement. Such
actions would materially and adversely affect Group Inc.’s liquidity. As a
result, during a period of severe stress, Group Inc. might commence bankruptcy
proceedings at an earlier time than it otherwise would if the CLSA and related
security agreement had not been implemented.

If Group Inc.’s proposed resolution strategy were successful, Group Inc.’s
security holders could face losses while the third-party creditors of Group
Inc.’s major subsidiaries would incur no losses because those subsidiaries
would continue to operate and not enter resolution or bankruptcy proceedings.
As part of the strategy, Group Inc. could also seek to elevate the priority of
its guarantee obligations relating to its major subsidiaries’ derivative
contracts or transfer them to another entity so that cross-default and early
termination rights would be stayed under the ISDA Protocols, as applicable,
which would result in holders of Group Inc.’s eligible long-term debt and
holders of Group Inc.’s other debt securities incurring losses ahead of the
beneficiaries of those guarantee obligations. It is also possible that holders
of Group Inc.’s eligible long-term debt and other debt securities could incur
losses ahead of other similarly situated creditors of Group Inc.’s major
subsidiaries.

If Group Inc.’s proposed resolution strategy were not successful, Group Inc.’s
financial condition would be adversely impacted and Group Inc.’s security
holders, including debtholders, may as a consequence be in a worse position
than if the strategy had not been implemented. In all cases, any payments to
debtholders are dependent on our ability to make such payments and are
therefore subject to our credit risk.

As a result of our recovery and resolution planning processes, including
incorporating feedback from our regulators, we may incur increased
operational, funding or other costs and face limitations on our ability to
structure our internal organization or engage in internal or external
activities in a manner that we may otherwise deem most operationally
efficient.

Our commodities activities, particularly our physical commodities activities,
subject us to extensive regulation and involve certain potential risks,
including environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to
significant liabilities and costs.

As part of our commodities business, we purchase and sell certain physical
commodities, arrange for their storage and transport, and engage in market
making of commodities. The commodities involved in these activities may
include crude oil, refined oil products, natural gas, liquefied natural gas,
electric power, agricultural products, metals (base and precious), minerals
(including unenriched uranium), emission credits, coal, freight and related
products and indices.

We make investments in and finance entities that engage in the production,
storage and transportation of numerous commodities, including many of the
commodities referenced above.

These activities subject us and/or the entities in which we invest to
extensive and evolving federal, state and local energy, environmental,
antitrust and other governmental laws and regulations worldwide, including
environmental laws and regulations relating to, among others, air quality,
water quality, waste management, transportation of hazardous substances,
natural resources, site remediation and health and safety. Additionally,
rising climate change concerns have led to additional regulation that could
increase the operating costs and adversely affect the profitability of certain
of our investments.

There may be substantial costs in complying with current or future laws and
regulations relating to our commodities-related activities and investments.
Compliance with these laws and regulations could require significant
commitments of capital toward environmental monitoring, renovation of storage
facilities or transport vessels, payment of emission fees and carbon or other
taxes, and application for, and holding of, permits and licenses.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Commodities involved in our intermediation activities and investments are also
subject to the risk of unforeseen or catastrophic events, which are likely to
be outside of our control, including those arising from the breakdown or
failure of transport vessels, storage facilities or other equipment or
processes or other mechanical malfunctions, fires, leaks, spills or release of
hazardous substances, performance below expected levels of output or
efficiency, terrorist attacks, extreme weather events or other natural
disasters or other hostile or catastrophic events. In addition, we rely on
third-party suppliers or service providers to perform their contractual
obligations and any failure on their part, including the failure to obtain raw
materials at reasonable prices or to safely transport or store commodities,
could expose us to costs or losses. Also, while we seek to insure against
potential risks, we may not be able to obtain insurance to cover some of these
risks and the insurance that we have may be inadequate to cover our losses.

The occurrence of any of such events may prevent us from performing under our
agreements with clients, may impair our operations or financial results and
may result in litigation, regulatory action, negative publicity or other
reputational harm.

We may also be required to divest or discontinue certain of these activities
for regulatory or legal reasons or due to the transition to a less carbon-
dependent economy in response to climate change.

Competition

Our results have been and may in the future be adversely affected by the
composition of our client base.

Our client base is not the same as that of our major competitors. Our
businesses may have a higher or lower percentage of clients in certain
industries or markets than some or all of our competitors. Therefore,
unfavorable industry developments or market conditions affecting certain
industries or markets have resulted in the past and may result in the future
in our businesses underperforming relative to similar businesses of a
competitor if our businesses have a higher concentration of clients in such
industries or markets. For example, our market-making businesses have a higher
percentage of clients with actively managed assets than some of our
competitors and such clients have in the past and may in the future be
disproportionately affected by low volatility.

Correspondingly, favorable or simply less adverse developments or market
conditions involving industries or markets in a business where we have a lower
concentration of clients in such industry or market have also resulted in the
past and may result in the future in our underperforming relative to a similar
business of a competitor that has a higher concentration of clients in such
industry or market. For example, we have a smaller corporate client base in
our market-making businesses than some of our peers and therefore those
competitors may benefit more from increased activity by corporate clients.
Similarly, we have not historically engaged in retail equities intermediation
to the same extent as other financial institutions, which has in the past and
could in the future adversely affect our market share in equities execution.

The financial services industry is highly competitive.

The financial services industry and all of our businesses are intensely
competitive, and we expect them to remain so. We compete on the basis of a
number of factors, including transaction execution, our products and services,
innovation, reputation, creditworthiness and price. There has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial services
industry. This has hastened the globalization of the securities and other
financial services markets. As a result, we have had to commit capital to
support our international operations and to execute large global transactions.
To the extent we expand into new business areas and new geographic regions, we
will face competitors with more experience and more established relationships
with clients, regulators and industry participants in the relevant market,
which could adversely affect our ability to expand.

Governments and regulators have adopted regulations, imposed taxes, adopted
compensation restrictions or otherwise put forward various proposals that have
impacted or may impact our ability to conduct certain of our businesses in a
cost-effective manner or at all in certain or all jurisdictions, including
proposals relating to restrictions on the type of activities in which
financial institutions are permitted to engage. These or other similar rules,
many of which do not apply to all our U.S. or

non-U.S.

competitors, could impact our ability to compete effectively.

Pricing and other competitive pressures in our businesses have continued to
increase, particularly in situations where some of our competitors may seek to
increase market share by reducing prices. For example, in connection with
investment banking and other assignments, in response to competitive pressure
we have experienced, we have extended and priced credit at levels that may not
always fully compensate us for the risks we take.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

The financial services industry is highly interrelated in that a significant
volume of transactions occur among a limited number of members of that
industry. Many transactions are syndicated to other financial institutions and
financial institutions are often counterparties in transactions. This has led
to claims by other market participants and regulators that such institutions
have colluded in order to manipulate markets or market prices, including
allegations that antitrust laws have been violated. While we have extensive
procedures and controls that are designed to identify and prevent such
activities, allegations of such activities, particularly by regulators, can
have a negative reputational impact and can subject us to large fines and
settlements, and potentially significant penalties, including treble damages.

The growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new products and
technologies, including trading technologies and cryptocurrencies, has
increased competition.

Technology is fundamental to our business and our industry. The growth of
electronic trading and the introduction of new technologies is changing our
businesses and presenting us with new challenges. Securities, futures and
options transactions are increasingly occurring electronically, both on our
own systems and through other alternative trading systems, and it appears that
the trend toward alternative trading systems will continue. Some of these
alternative trading systems compete with us, particularly our exchange-based
market-making activities, and we may experience continued competitive
pressures in these and other areas. In addition, the increased use by our
clients of

low-cost

electronic trading systems and direct electronic access to trading markets
could cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. As our clients
increasingly use our systems to trade directly in the markets, we may incur
liabilities as a result of their use of our order routing and execution
infrastructure.

We have invested significant resources into the development of electronic
trading systems and expect to continue to do so, but there is no assurance
that the revenues generated by these systems will yield an adequate return,
particularly given the generally lower commissions arising from electronic
trades.

In addition, the emergence, adoption and evolution of new technologies,
including distributed ledgers, such as cryptocurrencies and blockchain, have
required us to invest resources to adapt our existing products and services,
and we expect to continue to make such investments, which could be material.
The adoption and evolution of such new technologies may also increase our
compliance and regulatory costs. Further, technologies, such as
cryptocurrencies, that do not require intermediation could also significantly
disrupt payments processing and other financial services. Regulatory
limitations on our involvement in products and platforms involving
technologies such as cryptocurrencies may not apply equally or in some cases
at all to certain of our competitors. We may not be as timely or successful in
developing or integrating, or even able to develop or integrate, new products
and technologies, such as cryptocurrencies, into our existing products and
services, adapting to changes in consumer preferences or achieving market
acceptance of our products and services, any of which could affect our ability
to attract or retain clients, cause us to lose market share or result in
service disruptions and in turn reduce our revenues or otherwise adversely
affect us.

Our businesses would be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain
qualified employees.

Our performance is largely dependent on the talents and efforts of highly
skilled people; therefore, our continued ability to compete effectively in our
businesses, to manage our businesses effectively and to expand into new
businesses and geographic areas depends on our ability to attract new talented
and diverse employees and to retain and motivate our existing employees.
Factors that affect our ability to attract and retain such employees include
the level and composition of our compensation and benefits, and our reputation
as a successful business with a culture of fairly hiring, training and
promoting qualified employees. As a significant portion of the compensation
that we pay to our employees is in the form of

year-end

discretionary compensation, a significant portion of which is in the form of
deferred equity-related awards, declines in our profitability, or in the
outlook for our future profitability, as well as regulatory limitations on
compensation levels and terms, can negatively impact our ability to hire and
retain highly qualified employees.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Competition from within the financial services industry and from businesses
outside the financial services industry, including the technology industry,
for qualified employees has often been intense. We have experienced increased
competition in hiring and retaining employees to address the demands of,
expanding consumer-oriented businesses and our technology initiatives. This is
also the case in emerging and growth markets, where we are often competing for
qualified employees with entities that have a significantly greater presence
or more extensive experience in the region.

Changes in law or regulation in jurisdictions in which our operations are
located that affect taxes on our employees’ income, or the amount or
composition of compensation, may also adversely affect our ability to hire and
retain qualified employees in those jurisdictions.

As described further in “Business — Regulation — Compensation Practices” in
Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K,

our compensation practices are subject to review by, and the standards of, the
FRB. As a large global financial and banking institution, we are subject to
limitations on compensation practices (which may or may not affect the
companies with which we compete for talent) by the FRB, the PRA, the FCA, the
FDIC and other regulators worldwide. These limitations have shaped our
compensation practices, which has in some cases adversely affected our ability
to attract and retain talented employees, in particular in relation to
companies not subject to these limitations, and future legislation or
regulation may have similar adverse effects.

Our operating expenses and efficiency ratio depend, in part, on our overall
headcount and the proportion of our employees located in strategic locations.
Our future human capital resource requirements and the benefits provided by
strategic locations are uncertain, and we may not realize the benefits we
anticipate.

Market Developments and General Business Environment

Our businesses, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations have
been and may in the future be adversely affected by the

COVID-19

pandemic.

The

COVID-19

pandemic created economic and financial disruptions that have in the past
adversely affected and may in the future adversely affect our business,
financial condition, liquidity and results of operations. The extent to which
the

COVID-19

pandemic will negatively affect our businesses, financial condition, liquidity
and results of operations will depend on future developments, including the
emergence of new variants of

COVID-19

and the effectiveness of vaccines and treatments over the long term and
against new variants, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.

While financial markets have rebounded from the significant declines that
occurred early in the pandemic and global economic conditions generally
improved in 2021, certain of the circumstances that arose or became more
pronounced after the onset of the

COVID-19

pandemic persisted in 2021, including (i) relatively weak consumer confidence;
(ii) low levels of the federal funds rate and yields on U.S. Treasury
securities which, at times, were near zero; (iii) ongoing heightened credit
risk with regard to industries that have been most severely impacted by the
pandemic, including, at times, oil and gas, gaming and lodging, and airlines;
(iv) significant interest at times by investors in liquidity products, which
generate lower fees, relative to risk assets, resulting in these products
comprising a higher share of AUS as compared to the

pre-pandemic

composition; (v) higher cyber security, information security and operational
risks; and (vi) interruptions in the supply chain that have adversely affected
many businesses and have contributed to higher rates of inflation.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Depending on the duration and severity of the pandemic going forward, as well
as the effects of the pandemic on consumer and corporate confidence, the
conditions noted above could continue for an extended period and other adverse
developments may occur or reoccur, including (i) a repeat, or worse, of the
decline in the valuation of equity, fixed-income and commodity markets that
occurred at the outset of the pandemic; (ii) market dislocations that may make
hedging strategies less effective or ineffective; (iii) a reduction in fees on
AUS due to declines in the valuation of assets or a protracted trend toward
asset classes that generate lower fees; (iv) disruption in the new issuance
markets for debt and equity, leading to a decline in underwriting volumes; (v)
declines in completed mergers and acquisitions; (vi) a deterioration in the
liquidity profile of corporate borrowers, resulting in additional draws on
credit lines; (vii) defaults by consumers or corporate clients on loans;
(viii) changes in consumer spending or borrowing patterns; and (ix) greater
challenges in valuing derivative positions and associated collateral, leading
to significant increases in collateral calls and valuation disputes.

The effects of the

COVID-19

pandemic on economic and market conditions have in the past and may in the
future also increase demands on our liquidity as we meet client needs.
Likewise, these adverse developments have in the past and may in the future
affect our capital and leverage ratios. The effects of the

COVID-19

pandemic and FRB requirements have in the past limited and may in the future
limit capital distributions.

Governmental authorities worldwide have taken increased measures to stabilize
the markets and support economic growth. The continued success of these
measures is unknown and they may not be sufficient to address future market
dislocations or avert severe and prolonged reductions in economic activity.

Certain of our businesses, our funding instruments and financial products may
be adversely affected by changes in or the discontinuance of Interbank Offered
Rates (IBORs), in particular LIBOR.

The FCA and the administrator of LIBOR have announced that the publication of
the most commonly used USD LIBOR settings will cease to be provided or cease
to be representative after June 30, 2023. The publication of all other LIBOR
settings ceased to be provided or ceased to be representative as of December
31, 2021. The U.S. federal banking agencies had also issued guidance strongly
encouraging banking organizations to cease using the USD LIBOR as a reference
rate in new contracts by December 31, 2021 at the latest. As the transition
from LIBOR is ongoing, there continues to be substantial uncertainty as to the
ultimate effect of the transition on the financial markets for LIBOR-linked
financial instruments. Similar developments have occurred with respect to
other IBORs.

Uncertainty regarding IBORs and the taking of discretionary actions or
negotiation or implementation of fallback provisions could result in pricing
volatility, loss of market share in certain products, adverse tax or
accounting impacts, compliance, legal and operational costs and risks
associated with client disclosures, as well as systems disruption, model
disruption and other business continuity issues. In addition, uncertainty
relating to IBORs could result in increased capital requirements for us given
potential low transaction volumes, a lack of liquidity or limited
observability for exposures linked to IBORs or any emerging successor rates
and operational incidents associated with changes in and the discontinuance of
IBORs.

The language in our contracts and financial instruments that define IBORs, in
particular LIBOR, have developed over time and have various events that
trigger when a successor rate to the designated rate would be selected. Once a
trigger is satisfied, contracts and financial instruments often give the
calculation agent (which may be us) discretion over the successor rate or
benchmark to be selected. As a result, for the most commonly used USD LIBOR
settings, there continues to be considerable uncertainty as to how the
financial services industry will address the discontinuance of designated
rates in contracts and financial instruments or such designated rates ceasing
to be acceptable reference rates. This uncertainty could ultimately result in
client disputes and litigation surrounding the proper interpretation of our
IBOR-based contracts and financial instruments. For LIBOR settings that ceased
to be provided or ceased to be representative as of December 2021,
discretionary actions taken in connection with the implementation of fallback
provisions could also result in client disputes and litigation particularly
for derivatives and other synthetic instruments. Although we have adhered to
the ISDA IBOR Fallbacks Protocol, the protocol is applicable to derivatives
when both parties adhere to the protocol or otherwise agree for it to apply to
their derivatives.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Further, the discontinuation of an IBOR, changes in an IBOR or changes in
market acceptance of any IBOR as a reference rate may also adversely affect
the yield on loans or securities held by us, amounts paid on securities we
have issued, amounts received and paid on derivative instruments we have
entered into, the value of such loans, securities or derivative instruments,
the trading market for securities, the terms of new loans being made using
different or modified reference rates, our ability to effectively use
derivative instruments to manage risk, or the availability or cost of our
floating-rate funding and our exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.

Certain of our businesses and our funding instruments may be adversely
affected by changes in other reference rates, currencies, indexes, baskets or
ETFs to which products we offer or funding that we raise are linked.

Many of the products that we own or that we offer, such as structured notes,
warrants, swaps or security-based swaps, pay interest or determine the
principal amount to be paid at maturity or in the event of default by
reference to rates or by reference to an index, currency, basket, ETF or other
financial metric (the underlier). In the event that the composition of the
underlier is significantly changed, by reference to rules governing such
underlier or otherwise, the underlier ceases to exist (for example, in the
event that a country withdraws from the Euro or links its currency to or
delinks its currency from another currency or benchmark, an index or ETF
sponsor materially alters the composition of an index or ETF, or stocks in a
basket are delisted or become impermissible to be included in the index or
ETF), the underlier ceases to be recognized as an acceptable market benchmark
or there are legal or regulatory constraints on linking a financial instrument
to the underlier, we may experience adverse effects consistent with those
described above for IBORs.

We face enhanced risks as new business initiatives and acquisitions lead us to
engage in new activities, operate in new locations, transact with a broader
array of clients and counterparties and expose us to new asset classes and new
markets.

A number of our recent and planned business initiatives and expansions of
existing businesses, including through acquisitions and partnership
arrangements, may bring us into contact, directly or indirectly, with
individuals and entities that are not within our traditional client and
counterparty base, expose us to new asset classes and new markets, and present
us with integration challenges. For example, we continue to transact business
and invest in new regions, including a wide range of emerging and growth
markets, and we expect this trend to continue. Various emerging and growth
market countries have experienced severe economic and financial disruptions,
including significant devaluations of their currencies, defaults or threatened
defaults on sovereign debt, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or
negative growth rates in their economies. The possible effects of any of these
conditions include an adverse impact on our businesses and increased
volatility in financial markets generally.

Furthermore, in a number of our businesses, including where we make markets,
invest and lend, we own interests in, or otherwise become affiliated with the
ownership and operation of, public services, such as airports, toll roads and
shipping ports, as well as physical commodities and commodities infrastructure
components, both within and outside the U.S.

We have increased and intend to further increase our consumer-oriented
deposit-taking and lending activities. For example, we now issue credit cards
to consumers and through our pending acquisition of GreenSky, we intend to
expand our offering of

point-of-sale

financing. To the extent we engage in those and other consumer-oriented
activities, we have faced, and would continue to face, additional compliance,
legal and regulatory risk, increased reputational risk and increased
operational risk due to, among other things, higher transaction volumes and
significantly increased retention and transmission of consumer and client
information. Acquisitions and new products can also expose us to new or
different types of risks. For example, providing

point-of-sale

financing through GreenSky will also subject us to risks relating to retaining
and attracting merchants and servicing loans for other banks, as well as
potential liability for remediation costs if merchants fail to fulfill their
obligations to consumers. We are also subject to additional legal
requirements, including with respect to suitability and consumer protection
(for example, Regulation Best Interest, fair lending laws and regulations and
privacy laws and regulations). Further, identity fraud may increase and credit
reporting practices may change in a manner that makes it more difficult for
financial institutions, such as us, to evaluate the creditworthiness of
consumers.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

We have increased and intend to further increase our transaction banking
activities. As a result, we expect to face additional compliance, legal and
regulatory risk, including with respect to know-your-customer, anti-money
laundering and reporting requirements and prohibitions on transfers of
property belonging to countries, entities and individuals subject to sanctions
by U.S. or other governmental authorities.

New business initiatives expose us to new and enhanced risks, including risks
associated with dealing with governmental entities, reputational concerns
arising from dealing with different types of clients, business partners,
counterparties and investors, greater regulatory scrutiny of these activities,
increased credit-related, market, sovereign and operational risks, risks
arising from accidents or acts of terrorism, and reputational concerns with
the manner in which certain assets are being operated or held or in which we
interact with these clients, business partners, counterparties and investors.
Legal, regulatory and reputational risks may also exist in connection with
activities and transactions involving new products or markets where there is
regulatory uncertainty or where there are different or conflicting regulations
depending on the regulator or the jurisdiction involved, particularly where
transactions in such products may involve multiple jurisdictions.

We have developed and pursued new business and strategic initiatives,
including acquisitions, and expect to continue to do so. If and to the extent
we are unable to successfully execute those initiatives, we may incur
unanticipated costs and losses, and face other adverse consequences, such as
negative reputational effects. In addition, the actual effects of pursuing
those initiatives may differ, possibly materially, from the benefits that we
expect to realize from them, such as generating additional revenues, achieving
expense savings, reducing operational risk exposures or using capital and
funding more efficiently. Engaging in new activities exposes us to a variety
of risks, including that we may be unable to successfully develop new,
competitive, efficient and effective systems and processes, and hire and
retain the necessary personnel. Due to our lack of historical experience with
unsecured consumer lending, our loan loss assumptions may prove to be
incorrect and we may incur losses significantly above those which we
originally anticipated in entering the business or in expanding the product
offerings for the business.

In recent years, we have invested, and may continue to invest, more in
businesses that we expect will generate a higher level of more consistent
revenues. In order to develop and be able to offer consumer financial products
that compete effectively, we have made and expect to continue to make
significant investments in technology and human capital resources in
connection with our consumer-oriented activities. Such investments and
acquisitions may not be successful or have returns similar to our other
businesses.

We may not be able to fully realize the expected benefits or synergies from
acquisitions in the time frames we expect, or at all.

We have been engaging in selective acquisitions and expect to continue to do
so in the future and these acquisitions may, individually or in the aggregate,
be material to us. Any future acquisitions could involve the issuance of
common stock and/or the payment of cash as consideration. The success of our
acquisitions will depend, in part, on our ability to integrate the acquired
businesses and realize anticipated synergies, cost savings and growth
opportunities. We may face numerous risks and uncertainties in combining and
integrating the relevant businesses and systems, including the need to combine
or separate accounting and data processing systems and management controls and
to integrate relationships with clients, counterparties, regulators and others
in connection with acquisitions. Integration of acquired businesses is

time-consuming

and could disrupt our ongoing businesses, produce unforeseen regulatory or
operating difficulties, cause us to incur incremental expenses or require
incremental financial, management and other resources. It is also possible
that an acquisition, once announced, may not close due to the failure to
satisfy applicable closing conditions, such as the receipt of necessary
shareholder or regulatory approvals.

There is no assurance that any of our acquisitions will be successfully
integrated or yield all of the expected positive benefits and synergies in the
time frames that we expect, or at all. If we are not able to integrate our
acquisitions successfully, our results of operations, financial condition and
cash flows could be adversely affected.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments

There are no material unresolved written comments that were received from the
SEC staff 180 days or more before the end of our fiscal year relating to our
periodic or current reports under the Exchange Act.

Item 2. Properties

In the U.S. and elsewhere in the Americas, we have offices consisting of
approximately 6.6 million square feet of leased and owned space. Our principal
executive offices are located at 200 West Street, New York, New York and
consist of approximately 2.1 million square feet. The building is located on a
parcel leased from Battery Park City Authority pursuant to a ground lease.
Under the lease, Battery Park City Authority holds title to all improvements,
including the office building, subject to our right of exclusive possession
and use until June 2069, the expiration date of the lease. Under the terms of
the ground lease, we made a lump sum ground rent payment in June 2007 of $161
million for rent through the term of the lease.

In Europe, the Middle East and Africa, we have offices consisting of
approximately 1.6 million square feet of leased and owned space. Our European
headquarters is located in London at Plumtree Court, consisting of
approximately 826,000 square feet under a lease which can be terminated in

In Asia, Australia and New Zealand, we have offices consisting of
approximately 2.6 million square feet, including our offices in India, and
regional headquarters in Tokyo and Hong Kong. In India, we have offices with
approximately 1.6 million square feet, the majority of which have leases that
will expire in 2028.

In the preceding paragraphs, square footage figures are provided only for
properties that are used in the operation of our businesses. We regularly
evaluate our space capacity in relation to current and projected headcount. We
may incur exit costs in the future if we (i) reduce our space capacity or (ii)
commit to, or occupy, new properties in locations in which we operate and
dispose of existing space that had been held for potential growth. These costs
may be material to our operating results in a given period.

Item 3. Legal Proceedings

We are involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration
proceedings concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of our
businesses. Many of these proceedings are in early stages, and many of these
cases seek an indeterminate amount of damages. We have estimated the upper end
of the range of reasonably possible aggregate loss for matters where we have
been able to estimate a range and we believe, based on currently available
information, that the results of matters where we have not been able to
estimate a range of reasonably possible loss, in the aggregate, will not have
a material adverse effect on our financial condition, but may be material to
our operating results in a given period. Given the range of litigation and
investigations presently under way, our litigation expenses may remain high.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations — Use of Estimates” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K.

See Notes 18 and 27 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item
8 of this

Form 10-K

for information about our reasonably possible aggregate loss estimate and
judicial, regulatory and legal proceedings.

Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures

Not applicable.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

PART II

Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities

The principal market on which our common stock is traded is the NYSE under the
symbol “GS.” Information relating to the performance of our common stock from
December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2021 is set forth in “Supplemental
Financial Information — Common Stock Performance” in Part II, Item 8 of this

Form 10-K.

As of February 11, 2022, there were 5,963 holders of record of our common
stock.

The table below presents purchases made by or on behalf of Group Inc. or any
“affiliated purchaser” (as defined in

Rule 10b-18(a)(3)

under the Exchange Act) of our common stock during the fourth quarter of 2021.

Since March 2000, our Board has approved a repurchase program authorizing
repurchases of up to 605 million shares of our common stock. The repurchase
program is effected primarily through regular open-market purchases (which may
include repurchase plans designed to comply with

Rule 10b5-1

and accelerated share repurchases), the amounts and timing of which are
determined primarily by our current and projected capital position, but which
may also be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price
and trading volumes of our common stock. The repurchase program has no set
expiration or termination date.

Information relating to compensation plans under which our equity securities
are authorized for issuance is presented in Part III, Item 12 of this

Form 10-K.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations

Introduction

The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (Group Inc. or parent company), a Delaware
corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries, is a leading global
financial institution that delivers a broad range of financial services across
investment banking, securities, investment management and consumer banking to
a large and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and individuals. Founded in 1869, we are
headquartered in New York and maintain offices in all major financial centers
around the world. We report our activities in four business segments:
Investment Banking, Global Markets, Asset Management, and Consumer & Wealth
Management. See “Results of Operations” for further information about our
business segments.

When we use the terms “we,” “us” and “our,” we mean Group Inc. and its
consolidated subsidiaries. When we use the term “our subsidiaries,” we mean
the consolidated subsidiaries of Group Inc. References to “this

Form 10-K”

are to our Annual Report on

Form 10-K

for the year ended December 31, 2021. All references to “the consolidated
financial statements” or “Supplemental Financial Information” are to Part II,
Item 8 of this

Form 10-K.

All references to 2021, 2020 and 2019 refer to our years ended, or the dates,
as the context requires, December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31,
2019, respectively. Any reference to a future year refers to a year ending on
December 31 of that year.

Group Inc. is a bank holding company (BHC) and a financial holding company
regulated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB).

In this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of
operations, we have included information that may constitute “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the U.S.
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements
are not historical facts or statements of current conditions, but instead
represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their
nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control.

By identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to
the possibility that our actual results, financial condition, liquidity and
capital actions may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results,
financial condition, liquidity and capital actions in these forward-looking
statements. Important factors that could cause our results, financial
condition, liquidity and capital actions to differ from those in these
statements include, among others, those described in “Risk Factors” in Part I,
Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

and “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

These statements may relate to, among other things, (i) our future plans and
results, including our target ROE, ROTE, efficiency ratio, Common Equity Tier
1 (CET1) capital ratio and firmwide assets under supervision (AUS) inflows,
and how they can be achieved, (ii) trends in or growth opportunities for our
businesses, including the timing, costs, profitability, benefits and other
aspects of business and strategic initiatives and their impact on our
efficiency ratio, (iii) our level of future compensation expense, including as
a percentage of both operating expenses and revenues net of provision for
credit losses, (iv) our investment banking transaction backlog and future
results, (v) our expected interest income and interest expense, (vi) our
expense savings and strategic locations initiatives, (vii) expenses we may
incur, including future litigation expense and expenses from investing in our
consumer and transaction banking businesses, (viii) the projected growth of
our deposits and other funding, asset liability management and funding
strategies and related interest expense savings, (ix) our business
initiatives, including transaction banking and new consumer financial
products, (x) our planned 2022 benchmark debt issuances, (xi) the amount,
composition and location of global core liquid assets (GCLA) we expect to
hold, (xii) our credit exposures, (xiii) our expected provisions for credit
losses, (xiv) the adequacy of our allowance for credit losses, (xv) the
projected growth of our consumer lending and credit card businesses, (xvi) the
objectives and effectiveness of our Business Continuity Planning (BCP)
strategy, information security program, risk management and liquidity
policies, (xvii) our resolution plan and strategy and their implications for
stakeholders, (xviii) the design and effectiveness of our resolution capital
and liquidity models and triggers and alerts framework, (xix) the results of
stress tests, the effect of changes to regulations, and our future status,
activities or reporting under banking and financial regulation, (xx) our
expected tax rate, (xxi) the future state of our liquidity and regulatory
capital ratios, and our prospective capital distributions (including dividends
and repurchases), (xxii) our expected SCB and

G-SIB

surcharge, (xxiii) legal proceedings, governmental investigations or other
contingencies, (xxiv) the asset recovery guarantee and our remediation
activities related to our 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) settlements,
(xxv) the replacement of IBORs and our transition to alternative risk-free
reference rates, (xxvi) the impact of the coronavirus

(COVID-19)

pandemic on our business, results, financial position and liquidity, (xxvii)
the effectiveness of our management of our human capital, including our
diversity goals, (xxviii) our sustainability and carbon neutrality targets and
goals, (xxix) our plans for our people to return to our offices, (xxx) future
inflation and (xxxi) our completed, announced and prospective acquisitions,
including our completed acquisition of the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio and our announced acquisitions of NN Investment Partners
and GreenSky, Inc. (GreenSky).

Executive Overview

We generated net earnings of $21.64 billion for 2021, significantly higher
compared with $9.46 billion for 2020. Diluted earnings per common share (EPS)
was $59.45 for 2021, significantly higher compared with $24.74 for 2020.
Return on average common shareholders’ equity (ROE) was 23.0% for 2021,
compared with 11.1% for 2020. Book value per common share was $284.39 as of
December 2021, 20.4% higher compared with December 2020.

During 2020, we recorded net provisions for litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $3.42 billion, which reduced diluted EPS by $9.51 and reduced
ROE by 3.9 percentage points.

Net revenues were $59.34 billion for 2021, 33% higher than 2020, reflecting
higher net revenues across all segments, including significant increases in
Asset Management, Investment Banking and Consumer & Wealth Management. Net
revenues in Asset Management primarily reflected significantly higher net
revenues in Equity investments and Lending and debt investments, net revenues
in Investment Banking primarily reflected significantly higher net revenues in
Financial advisory and Underwriting, and net revenues in Consumer & Wealth
Management reflected growth in both Wealth management and Consumer banking net
revenues. Net revenues in Global Markets were slightly higher, reflecting
significantly higher net revenues in Equities, partially offset by lower net
revenues in Fixed Income, Currency and Commodities (FICC) compared with a
strong prior year.

Provision for credit losses was $357 million for 2021, compared with $3.10
billion for 2020. 2021 included provisions related to portfolio growth
(primarily in credit cards, including provisions related to the commitment to
acquire the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio), largely offset by reserve reductions on wholesale and
consumer loans reflecting continued improvement in the broader economic
environment. This followed challenging conditions in the prior year as a
result of the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic, which contributed to significant provisions in 2020.

Operating expenses were $31.94 billion for 2021, 10% higher than 2020,
primarily reflecting significantly higher compensation and benefits expenses
(reflecting strong performance). In addition, technology expenses and
professional fees were significantly higher and transaction based expenses
were higher. These increases were partially offset by significantly lower net
provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings and lower expenses
related to consolidated investments (including impairments). Our efficiency
ratio (total operating expenses divided by total net revenues) for 2021 was
53.8%, compared with 65.0% for 2020. In 2020, net provisions for litigation
and regulatory proceedings increased our efficiency ratio by 7.6 percentage
points.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

During 2021, we returned $7.49 billion of capital to common shareholders,
including $5.20 billion of common share repurchases and $2.29 billion of
common stock dividends. As of December 2021, our CET1 capital ratio was 14.2%
under the Standardized Capital Rules and 14.9% under the Advanced Capital
Rules. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for further
information about our capital ratios.

We announced two strategic acquisitions during 2021, the pending acquisitions
of NN Investment Partners in our Asset Management business and GreenSky in our
Consumer banking business. We expect these acquisitions to accelerate our
strategy to drive more durable returns. The acquisition of NN Investment
Partners is expected to close in the second quarter of 2022, and the
acquisition of GreenSky is expected to close in the first quarter of 2022.

In the first quarter of 2022, we announced that over the medium-term
(approximately 3 years), our target is to achieve (i) ROE within a range of
14% to 16%, (ii) return on average tangible common shareholders’ equity (ROTE)
within a range of 15% to 17% and (iii) an efficiency ratio of approximately
60%. In addition, we announced that our target is to maintain capital ratios
equal to the regulatory requirements plus a buffer of 50 to 100 basis points.

Business Environment

In 2021, the global economy continued to recover from the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic, as the distribution of vaccines helped facilitate an increase in
global economic activity. Economic activity continued to benefit from ongoing
fiscal stimulus from governments and continued accommodative monetary policy
from global central banks. In the second half of the year, the growth in
economic activity and demand for goods and services, alongside supply chain
complications, contributed to inflationary pressures. Late in the year, the
surge in Omicron cases sparked renewed concerns globally, contributing to
increased market volatility and increased pressures on labor supply. This may
result in a negative impact on economic activity.

Despite broad improvements in the overall economy since the initial impact of
the

COVID-19

pandemic, uncertainty remains on the pace of the recovery going forward,
reflecting concerns about virus resurgence from the Omicron variant and other
possible variants and related concerns regarding vaccine distribution,
efficacy and hesitancy, as well as concerns relating to inflation, supply
chain complications and geopolitical risks. See “Results of Operations —
Segment Assets and Operating Results — Segment Operating Results” for further
information about the operating environment for each of our business segments.

Critical Accounting Policies

Fair Value

Fair Value Hierarchy.

Trading assets and liabilities, certain investments and loans, and certain
other financial assets and liabilities, are included in our consolidated
balance sheets at fair value (i.e.,

marked-to-market),

with related gains or losses generally recognized in our consolidated
statements of earnings. The use of fair value to measure financial instruments
is fundamental to our risk management practices and is our most critical
accounting policy.

The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received
to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date. We measure certain
financial assets and liabilities as a portfolio (i.e., based on its net
exposure to market and/or credit risks). In determining fair value, the
hierarchy under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP)
gives (i) the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets
for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities (level 1 inputs), (ii) the
next priority to inputs other than level 1 inputs that are observable, either
directly or indirectly (level 2 inputs), and (iii) the lowest priority to
inputs that cannot be observed in market activity (level 3 inputs). In
evaluating the significance of a valuation input, we consider, among other
factors, a portfolio’s net risk exposure to that input. Assets and liabilities
are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is
significant to their fair value measurement.

The fair values for substantially all of our financial assets and liabilities
are based on observable prices and inputs and are classified in levels 1 and 2
of the fair value hierarchy. Certain level 2 and level 3 financial assets and
liabilities may require appropriate valuation adjustments that a market
participant would require to arrive at fair value for factors, such as
counterparty and our credit quality, funding risk, transfer restrictions,
liquidity and bid/offer spreads.

Instruments classified in level 3 of the fair value hierarchy are those which
require one or more significant inputs that are not observable. Level 3
financial assets represented 1.6% as of December 2021 and 2.3% as of December
2020, of our total assets. See Notes 4 through 10 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about level 3 financial assets,
including changes in level 3 financial assets and related fair value
measurements. Absent evidence to the contrary, instruments classified in level
3 of the fair value hierarchy are initially valued at transaction price, which
is considered to be the best initial estimate of fair value. Subsequent to the
transaction date, we use other methodologies to determine fair value, which
vary based on the type of instrument. Estimating the fair value of level 3
financial instruments requires judgments to be made. These judgments include:

Determining the appropriate valuation methodology and/or model for each type
of level 3 financial instrument;  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Determining model inputs based on an evaluation of all relevant empirical
market data, including prices evidenced by market transactions, interest
rates, credit spreads, volatilities and correlations; and  

Determining appropriate valuation adjustments, including those related to
illiquidity or counterparty credit quality.  

Regardless of the methodology, valuation inputs and assumptions are only
changed when corroborated by substantive evidence.

Controls Over Valuation of Financial Instruments.

Market makers and investment professionals in our revenue-producing units are
responsible for pricing our financial instruments. Our control infrastructure
is independent of the revenue-producing units and is fundamental to ensuring
that all of our financial instruments are appropriately valued at market-
clearing levels. In the event that there is a difference of opinion in
situations where estimating the fair value of financial instruments requires
judgment (e.g., calibration to market comparables or trade comparison, as
described below), the final valuation decision is made by senior managers in
independent risk oversight and control functions. This independent price
verification is critical to ensuring that our financial instruments are
properly valued.

Price Verification.

All financial instruments at fair value classified in levels 1, 2 and 3 of the
fair value hierarchy are subject to our independent price verification
process. The objective of price verification is to have an informed and
independent opinion with regard to the valuation of financial instruments
under review. Instruments that have one or more significant inputs which
cannot be corroborated by external market data are classified in level 3 of
the fair value hierarchy. Price verification strategies utilized by our
independent risk oversight and control functions include:

Trade Comparison.

Analysis of trade data (both internal and external, where available) is used
to determine the most relevant pricing inputs and valuations.  

External Price Comparison.

Valuations and prices are compared to pricing data obtained from third parties
(e.g., brokers or dealers, IHS Markit, Bloomberg, IDC, TRACE). Data obtained
from various sources is compared to ensure consistency and validity. When
broker or dealer quotations or third-party pricing vendors are used for
valuation or price verification, greater priority is generally given to
executable quotations.  

Calibration to Market Comparables.

Market-based transactions are used to corroborate the valuation of positions
with similar characteristics, risks and components.  

Relative Value Analyses.

Market-based transactions are analyzed to determine the similarity, measured
in terms of risk, liquidity and return, of one instrument relative to another
or, for a given instrument, of one maturity relative to another.  

Collateral Analyses.

Margin calls on derivatives are analyzed to determine implied values, which
are used to corroborate our valuations.  

Execution of Trades.

Where appropriate, market-making desks are instructed to execute trades in
order to provide evidence of market-clearing levels.  

Backtesting.

Valuations are corroborated by comparison to values realized upon sales.  

See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about fair value measurements.

Review of Net Revenues.

Independent risk oversight and control functions ensure adherence to our
pricing policy through a combination of daily procedures, including the
explanation and attribution of net revenues based on the underlying factors.
Through this process, we independently validate net revenues, identify and
resolve potential fair value or trade booking issues on a timely basis and
seek to ensure that risks are being properly categorized and quantified.

Review of Valuation Models.

Our independent model risk management group (Model Risk), consisting of
quantitative professionals who are separate from model developers, performs an
independent model review and validation process of our valuation models. New
or changed models are reviewed and approved prior to implementation. Models
are reviewed annually to assess the impact of any changes in the product or
market and any market developments in pricing theories. See “Risk Management —

Model Risk Management” for further information about the review and validation
of our valuation models.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Allowance for Credit Losses

We estimate and record an allowance for credit losses related to our loans
held for investment that are accounted for at amortized cost. To determine the
allowance for credit losses, we classify our loans accounted for at amortized
cost into wholesale and consumer portfolios. These portfolios represent the
level at which we have developed and documented our methodology to determine
the allowance for credit losses. The allowance for credit losses is measured
on a collective basis for loans that exhibit similar risk characteristics
using a modeled approach and asset-specific basis for loans that do not share
similar risk characteristics.

The allowance for credit losses takes into account the weighted average of a
range of forecasts of future economic conditions over the expected life of the
loans and lending commitments. The expected life of each loan or lending
commitment is determined based on the contractual term adjusted for extension
options or demand features, or is modeled in the case of revolving credit card
loans. The forecasts include baseline, favorable and adverse economic
scenarios over a three-year period. For loans with expected lives beyond three
years, the model reverts to historical loss information based on a

non-linear

modeled approach. We apply judgment in weighting individual scenarios each
quarter based on a variety of factors, including our internally derived
economic outlook, market consensus, recent macroeconomic conditions and
industry trends. The forecasted economic scenarios consider a number of risk
factors relevant to the wholesale and consumer portfolios. Risk factors for
wholesale loans include internal credit ratings, industry default and loss
data, expected life, macroeconomic indicators (e.g., unemployment rates and
GDP), the borrower’s capacity to meet its financial obligations, the
borrower’s country of risk and industry, loan seniority and collateral type.
In addition, for loans backed by real estate, risk factors include

loan-to-value

ratio, debt service ratio and home price index. Risk factors for installment
and credit card loans include Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO) credit scores,
delinquency status, loan vintage and macroeconomic indicators.

The allowance for credit losses also includes qualitative components which
allow management to reflect the uncertain nature of economic forecasting,
capture uncertainty regarding model inputs, and account for model imprecision
and concentration risk.

Our estimate of credit losses entails judgment about collectability at the
reporting dates, and there are uncertainties inherent in those judgments. The
allowance for credit losses is subject to a governance process that involves
review and approval by senior management within our independent risk oversight
and control functions. Personnel within our independent risk oversight and
control functions are responsible for forecasting the economic variables that
underlie the economic scenarios that are used in the modeling of expected
credit losses. While we use the best information available to determine this
estimate, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary based on, among
other things, changes in the economic environment or variances between actual
results and the original assumptions used. Loans are charged off against the
allowance for loan losses when deemed to be uncollectible.

We also record an allowance for credit losses on lending commitments which are
held for investment that are accounted for at amortized cost. Such allowance
is determined using the same methodology as the allowance for loan losses,
while also taking into consideration the probability of drawdowns or funding,
and whether such commitments are cancellable by us.

To estimate the potential impact of an adverse macroeconomic environment on
our allowance for credit losses, we, among other things, compared the expected
credit losses under the weighted average forecast used in the calculation of
allowance for credit losses as of December 2021 (which was primarily weighted
towards the baseline economic scenario) to the expected credit losses under a
100% weighted adverse economic scenario. The adverse macroeconomic model
assumes an emergence of new vaccine-resistant strains of

COVID-19

resulting in a resurgence of infections, an economic contraction, high
inflation rates in the initial quarters, gradually climbing unemployment
rates, decline in GDP growth rates and dislocations in the economy due to
shortages in the supply of some goods and services. A 100% weighting to the
adverse economic scenario would have resulted in an approximate $1.3 billion
increase in our allowance for credit losses as of December 2021. This
hypothetical increase does not take into consideration any potential
adjustments to qualitative reserves. The forecasts of macroeconomic conditions
are inherently uncertain and do not take into account any other offsetting or
correlated effects. The actual credit loss in an adverse macroeconomic
environment may differ significantly from this estimate. See Note 9 to the
consolidated financial statements for further information about the allowance
for credit losses.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Use of Estimates

U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions. In addition
to the estimates we make in connection with fair value measurements and the
allowance for credit losses on loans and lending commitments held for
investment and accounted for at amortized cost, the use of estimates and
assumptions is also important in determining the accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, provisions for losses that may arise from
litigation and regulatory proceedings (including governmental investigations),
and accounting for income taxes.

Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more
frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an impairment
may exist. When assessing goodwill for impairment, first, a qualitative
assessment can be made to determine whether it is more likely than not that
the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its estimated
carrying value. If the results of the qualitative assessment are not
conclusive, a quantitative goodwill test is performed. Alternatively, a
quantitative goodwill test can be performed without performing a qualitative
assessment. Estimating the fair value of our reporting units requires
judgment. Critical inputs to the fair value estimates include projected
earnings and allocated equity. There is inherent uncertainty in the projected
earnings. The estimated carrying value of each reporting unit reflects an
allocation of total shareholders’ equity and represents the estimated amount
of total shareholders’ equity required to support the activities of the
reporting unit under currently applicable regulatory capital requirements. See
Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about
goodwill. If we experience a prolonged or severe period of weakness in the
business environment, financial markets, our performance or our common stock
price, or additional increases in capital requirements, our goodwill could be
impaired in the future.

Identifiable intangible assets are tested for impairment when events or
changes in circumstances suggest that an asset’s or asset group’s carrying
value may not be fully recoverable. Judgment is required to evaluate whether
indications of potential impairment have occurred, and to test intangible
assets for impairment, if required. An impairment is recognized if the
estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is less
than the corresponding carrying value. See Note 12 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about identifiable intangible
assets.

We also estimate and provide for potential losses that may arise out of
litigation and regulatory proceedings to the extent that such losses are
probable and can be reasonably estimated. In addition, we estimate the upper
end of the range of reasonably possible aggregate loss in excess of the
related reserves for litigation and regulatory proceedings where we believe
the risk of loss is more than slight. See Notes 18 and 27 to the consolidated
financial statements for information about certain judicial, litigation and
regulatory proceedings. Significant judgment is required in making these
estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be materially different.
Our total estimated liability in respect of litigation and regulatory
proceedings is determined on a

case-by-case

basis and represents an estimate of probable losses after considering, among
other factors, the progress of each case, proceeding or investigation, our
experience and the experience of others in similar cases, proceedings or
investigations, and the opinions and views of legal counsel.

In accounting for income taxes, we recognize tax positions in the financial
statements only when it is more likely than not that the position will be
sustained on examination by the relevant taxing authority based on the
technical merits of the position. As of December 2021, our net liability for
unrecognized tax benefits was $1.16 billion. We use estimates to recognize
current and deferred income taxes in the U.S. federal, state and local and

non-U.S.

jurisdictions in which we operate. The income tax laws in these jurisdictions
are complex and can be subject to different interpretations between taxpayers
and taxing authorities. Disputes may arise over these interpretations and can
be settled by audit, administrative appeals or judicial proceedings. Our
interpretations are reevaluated quarterly based on guidance currently
available, tax examination experience and the opinions of legal counsel, among
other factors. We recognize deferred taxes based on the amount that will more
likely than not be realized in the future based on enacted income tax laws. As
of December 2021, we had $6.32 billion of deferred tax assets with a related
valuation allowance of $895 million. Our estimate for deferred taxes includes
estimates for future taxable earnings, including the level and character of
those earnings, and various tax planning strategies. See Note 24 to the
consolidated financial statements for further information about income taxes.

Recent Accounting Developments

See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for information about
Recent Accounting Developments.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Results of Operations

The composition of our net revenues has varied over time as financial markets
and the scope of our operations have changed. The composition of net revenues
can also vary over the shorter term due to fluctuations in U.S. and global
economic and market conditions. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

for further information about the impact of economic and market conditions on
our results of operations. For a discussion of our 2020 financial results
compared with 2019, see Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on

Form 10-K

for the year ended December 31, 2020.

Financial Overview

The table below presents an overview of our financial results and selected
financial ratios.

In the table above:

Net earnings to common represents net earnings applicable to common
shareholders, which is calculated as net earnings less preferred stock
dividends.  

Average equity to average assets is calculated by dividing average total
shareholders’ equity by average total assets.  

Dividend payout ratio is calculated by dividing dividends declared per common
share by diluted EPS.  

ROE is calculated by dividing net earnings to common by average monthly common
shareholders’ equity. Tangible common shareholders’ equity is calculated as
total shareholders’ equity less preferred stock, goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets. ROTE is calculated by dividing net earnings to common by
average monthly tangible common shareholders’ equity. We believe that tangible
common shareholders’ equity is meaningful because it is a measure that we and
investors use to assess capital adequacy and that ROTE is meaningful because
it measures the performance of businesses consistently, whether they were
acquired or developed internally. Tangible common shareholders’ equity and
ROTE are

non-GAAP

measures and may not be comparable to similar

non-GAAP

measures used by other companies. Return on average shareholders’ equity is
calculated by dividing net earnings by average monthly shareholders’ equity.  

The table below presents our average equity and the reconciliation of average
common shareholders’ equity to average tangible common shareholders’ equity.

Net Revenues

The table below presents our net revenues by line item.

In the table above:

Investment banking consists of revenues (excluding net interest) from
financial advisory and underwriting assignments. These activities are included
in our Investment Banking segment.  

Investment management consists of revenues (excluding net interest) from
providing asset management services across all major asset classes to a
diverse set of asset management clients (included in our Asset Management
segment), as well as asset management services, wealth advisory services and
certain transaction services for wealth management clients (included in our
Consumer & Wealth Management segment).  

Commissions and fees consists of revenues from executing and clearing client
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide, as well
as

over-the-counter

(OTC) transactions. These activities are included in our Global Markets and
Consumer & Wealth Management segments.  

Market making consists of revenues (excluding net interest) from client
execution activities related to making markets in interest rate products,
credit products, mortgages, currencies, commodities and equity products. These
activities are included in our Global Markets segment.  

Other principal transactions consists of revenues (excluding net interest)
from our equity investing activities, including revenues related to our
consolidated investments (included in our Asset Management segment), and
lending activities (included across our four segments).  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Operating Environment.

During 2021, a general recovery of the global economy, continued monetary and
fiscal support from central banks and governments and accelerating vaccine
distribution provided a favorable market backdrop. These factors contributed
to generally higher global equity prices and tighter credit spreads compared
with the end of 2020. In addition, market-making activities reflected strong
client activity levels, although activity declined from a very strong prior
year which reflected heightened volatility and significant market dislocations
as a result of the

COVID-19

pandemic, and investment banking activity levels across mergers and
acquisitions and underwriting were elevated.

If concerns about the economic outlook, including those on inflation and
supply chain issues, grow or the ongoing efforts to mitigate the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic are ineffective (including due to new variants or complications with
vaccine distribution, efficacy and hesitancy), it may lead to a decline in
global equity markets, a decline in investment banking activity levels, and a
continued decline in market-making activity levels, and net revenues and the
provision for credit losses would likely be negatively impacted. See “Segment
Assets and Operating Results — Segment Operating Results” for information
about the operating environment and material trends and uncertainties that may
impact our results of operations.

2021 versus 2020.

Net revenues in the consolidated statements of earnings were $59.34 billion
for 2021, 33% higher than 2020, reflecting significantly higher other
principal transactions revenues, investment banking revenues and net interest
income, and higher investment management revenues.

Non-Interest

Revenues.

Investment banking revenues in the consolidated statements of earnings were
$14.17 billion for 2021, 55% higher than 2020, due to significantly higher
revenues in financial advisory, reflecting a significant increase in completed
mergers and acquisitions volumes, in equity underwriting, primarily driven by
strong industry-wide initial public offerings activity, and in debt
underwriting, primarily reflecting elevated industry-wide leveraged finance
activity.

Investment management revenues in the consolidated statements of earnings were
$8.06 billion for 2021, 16% higher than 2020, primarily due to higher
management and other fees, reflecting the impact of higher average AUS,
partially offset by higher fee waivers on money market funds. In addition,
incentive fees were significantly higher, primarily driven by harvesting.

Commissions and fees in the consolidated statements of earnings were $3.62
billion for 2021, slightly higher than 2020.

Market making revenues in the consolidated statements of earnings were $15.35
billion for 2021, essentially unchanged compared with 2020, as significantly
lower revenues in interest rate products and credit products were largely
offset by significantly higher revenues in equity products (primarily in
derivatives) and commodities, and improved results in mortgages.

Other principal transactions revenues in the consolidated statements of
earnings were $11.67 billion for 2021, compared with $4.65 billion for 2020,
primarily reflecting significantly higher net gains from investments in
private equities and in debt instruments, partially offset by net losses from
investments in public equities compared with significant net gains in 2020.

Net Interest Income.

Net interest income in the consolidated statements of earnings was $6.47
billion for 2021, 36% higher than 2020, reflecting a decrease in interest
expense, partially offset by a decrease in interest income. The decrease in
interest expense is primarily related to other interest-bearing liabilities,
deposits and long-term borrowings, each reflecting the impact of lower
interest rates. The decrease in interest income primarily related to
collateralized agreements and trading assets, both reflecting the impact of
lower interest rates, partially offset by the impact of higher average
balances for loans. See “Supplemental Financial Information — Statistical
Disclosures — Distribution of Assets, Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity”
for further information about our sources of net interest income.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Provision for Credit Losses

Provision for credit losses consists of provision for credit losses on loans
and lending commitments held for investment and accounted for at amortized
cost. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for further
information about the provision for credit losses.

The table below presents our provision for credit losses.

2021 versus 2020.

Provision for credit losses in the consolidated statements of earnings was
$357 million for 2021, compared with $3.10 billion for 2020. 2021 included
provisions related to portfolio growth (primarily in credit cards, including
approximately $185 million of provisions related to the commitment to acquire
the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio), largely offset by reserve reductions on wholesale and
consumer loans reflecting continued improvement in the broader economic
environment. This followed challenging conditions in the prior year as a
result of the

COVID-19

pandemic, which contributed to significant provisions in 2020.

Operating Expenses

Our operating expenses are primarily influenced by compensation, headcount and
levels of business activity. Compensation and benefits includes salaries,

year-end

discretionary compensation, amortization of equity awards and other items such
as benefits. Discretionary compensation is significantly impacted by, among
other factors, the level of net revenues net of provision for credit losses,
overall financial performance, prevailing labor markets, business mix, the
structure of our share-based compensation programs and the external
environment.

The table below presents our operating expenses by line item and headcount.

2021 versus 2020.

Operating expenses in the consolidated statements of earnings were $31.94
billion for 2021, 10% higher than 2020. Our efficiency ratio for 2021 was
53.8%, compared with 65.0% for 2020. In 2020, net provisions for litigation
and regulatory proceedings increased our efficiency ratio by 7.6 percentage
points.

The increase in operating expenses compared with 2020 primarily reflected
significantly higher compensation and benefits expenses (reflecting strong
performance). In addition, technology expenses and professional fees were
significantly higher and transaction based expenses were higher. These
increases were partially offset by significantly lower net provisions for
litigation and regulatory proceedings and lower expenses related to
consolidated investments (including impairments).

Net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings for 2021 were $534
million compared with $3.42 billion for 2020.

Charitable contributions to Goldman Sachs Gives were approximately $250
million for 2021.

As of December 2021, headcount increased 8% compared with December 2020,
reflecting investments in new business initiatives and an increase in
technology professionals.

Provision for Taxes

The effective income tax rate for 2021 was 20.0%, down from the full year
income tax rate of 24.2% for 2020, primarily due to a decrease in provisions
for

non-deductible

litigation, partially offset by a decrease in the impact of tax benefits in
2021 compared with 2020.

In March 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Rescue Plan) was signed
into law. The Rescue Plan is a $1.9 trillion stimulus package enacted to help
address the economic and health impacts of the

COVID-19

pandemic. The Rescue Plan includes a repeal of a provision under which U.S.
affiliated groups could elect a worldwide allocation of interest expense for
foreign tax credit limitation purposes for one year beginning in January 2021.
Additionally, beginning in 2027, the limitation on corporate tax deductions
for compensation payable to the CEO, CFO and the top three highest paid
employees will be expanded to include the next five highest paid employees.
The legislation did not have a material impact on our 2021 annual effective
tax rate and is not expected to have a material impact on our 2022 annual
effective tax rate.

In April 2021, the New York State (NYS) FY 2022 budget was enacted. The
legislation temporarily increased the NYS corporate income tax rate from 6.5%
to 7.25% for calendar years 2021 through 2023. The legislation did not have a
material impact on our 2021 annual effective tax rate and is not expected to
have a material impact on our 2022 annual effective tax rate.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The U.K. Finance Act 2021 was enacted in June 2021 and includes a six percent
increase in the corporate income tax rate effective from April 2023. During
2021, U.K. deferred tax assets and liabilities were remeasured and a deferred
tax benefit of approximately $100 million was recognized. The Finance (No. 2)
Bill

issued in November 2021, includes a five percent reduction in the U.K. bank
surcharge tax rate, effective from April 2023. The bank surcharge is currently
applicable to certain of our U.K. subsidiaries and branches, including Goldman
Sachs International (GSI) and Goldman Sachs International Bank (GSIB).
Following Royal Assent, the associated impact of any change to the bank
surcharge on U.K. deferred tax assets and liabilities could have a material
impact on our effective tax rate, depending on the operating results for the
quarter during which this legislation is enacted.

We expect our tax rate for 2022 to be between 20% and 21%, excluding the
impact of income tax benefits on employee share-based awards and any potential
changes in current income tax rates.

Segment Assets and Operating Results

Segment Assets.

The table below presents assets by segment.

The allocation process for segment assets is based on the activities of these
segments. The allocation of assets includes allocation of GCLA (which consists
of unencumbered, highly liquid securities and cash), which is generally
included within cash and cash equivalents, collateralized agreements and
trading assets on our balance sheet. Due to the integrated nature of these
segments, estimates and judgments are made in allocating these assets. See
“Risk Management — Liquidity Risk Management” for further information about
our GCLA.

Segment Operating Results.

The table below presents our segment operating results.

Net revenues in our segments include allocations of interest income and
expense to specific positions in relation to the cash generated by, or funding
requirements of, such positions. See Note 25 to the consolidated financial
statements for further information about our business segments.

The allocation of common shareholders’ equity and preferred stock dividends to
each segment is based on the estimated amount of equity required to support
the activities of the segment under relevant regulatory capital requirements.
Net earnings for each segment is calculated by applying the firmwide tax rate
to each segment’s

pre-tax

earnings.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Effective January 1, 2021, the attributed equity among our segments was
updated to reflect the results of our 2020 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and
Review (CCAR) process. See “Capital Management and Regulatory Capital —
Capital Management” for information about the impact of these updates on the
allocation of attributed equity among our segments as of the beginning of the
first quarter of 2021. The average common equity balances above incorporate
such impact, as well as the changes in the size and composition of assets held
in each of our segments that occurred during 2021. See “Capital Management and
Regulatory Capital — Capital Management” for information about our 2021 CCAR
process and our updated SCB, which became effective on October 1, 2021.

Compensation and benefits expenses within our segments reflect, among other
factors, our overall performance, as well as the performance of individual
businesses. Consequently,

pre-tax

margins in one segment of our business may be significantly affected by the
performance of our other business segments. A description of segment operating
results follows.

Investment Banking

Investment Banking generates revenues from the following:

Financial advisory.

Includes strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and
acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings and
spin-offs.  

Underwriting.

Includes public offerings and private placements, including local and cross-
border transactions and acquisition financing, of a wide range of securities
and other financial instruments, including loans.  

Corporate lending.

Includes lending to corporate clients, including through relationship lending,
middle-market lending and acquisition financing. We also provide transaction
banking services to certain of our corporate clients.  

The table below presents our Investment Banking assets.

The table below presents our Investment Banking operating results.

The table below presents our financial advisory and underwriting transaction
volumes.

In the table above:

Volumes are per Dealogic.  

Announced and completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are based on full
credit to each of the advisors in a transaction. Equity and equity-related
offerings and debt offerings are based on full credit for single book managers
and equal credit for joint book managers. Transaction volumes may not be
indicative of net revenues in a given period. In addition, transaction volumes
for prior periods may vary from amounts previously reported due to the
subsequent withdrawal or a change in the value of a transaction.  

Equity and equity-related offerings includes Rule 144A and public common stock
offerings, convertible offerings and rights offerings.  

Debt offerings includes

non-convertible

preferred stock, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and
taxable municipal debt. Includes publicly registered and Rule 144A issues and
excludes leveraged loans.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Operating Environment.

During 2021, Investment Banking operated in an environment characterized by
strong industry-wide activity. In mergers and acquisitions, industry-wide
completed and announced volumes were at high levels, reflecting supportive
market conditions and strong CEO confidence. In underwriting, industry-wide
activity levels reflected continued strength in equity underwriting volumes,
including strong initial public offerings activity, and solid debt
underwriting volumes, including elevated leveraged finance activity.

In the future, if market and economic conditions deteriorate, and industry-
wide mergers and acquisitions volumes decline, or if industry-wide equity and
debt underwriting volumes decline, or credit spreads related to hedges on our
relationship lending portfolio tighten further, net revenues in Investment
Banking would likely be negatively impacted. In addition, a deterioration in
the creditworthiness of borrowers would negatively impact the provision for
credit losses.

2021 versus 2020.

Net revenues in Investment Banking were $14.88 billion for 2021, 58% higher
than 2020, primarily reflecting significantly higher net revenues in Financial
advisory and Underwriting.

The increase in Financial advisory net revenues reflected a significant
increase in completed mergers and acquisitions volumes. The increase in
Underwriting net revenues was due to significantly higher net revenues in both
Equity underwriting, primarily driven by strong industry-wide initial public
offerings activity, and Debt underwriting, primarily reflecting elevated
industry-wide leveraged finance activity. Corporate lending net revenues were
significantly higher, primarily reflecting net gains from lending activities
compared with net losses in the prior year, and significantly higher net
interest income.

Provision for credit losses was a net benefit of $298 million for 2021,
compared with net provisions of $1.62 billion for 2020, primarily due to
reserve reductions in the current year reflecting continued improvement in the
broader economic environment following challenging conditions in 2020
resulting from the

COVID-19

pandemic.

Operating expenses were $6.71 billion for 2021, 9% higher than 2020, due to
significantly higher compensation and benefits expenses (reflecting strong
performance), partially offset by significantly lower net provisions for
litigation and regulatory proceedings.

Pre-tax

earnings were $8.47 billion for 2021, compared with $1.67 billion for 2020.
ROE was 64.8% for 2021, compared with 10.5% for 2020 (which included the
impact of net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings that
reduced ROE by 11.5 percentage points).

As of December 2021, our investment banking transaction backlog increased
significantly compared with December 2020, due to significantly higher
estimated net revenues from potential financial advisory transactions and
potential debt underwriting transactions (particularly from leveraged finance
transactions), and higher estimated net revenues from potential equity
underwriting transactions.

Our backlog represents an estimate of our net revenues from future
transactions where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely
than not. We believe changes in our backlog may be a useful indicator of
client activity levels which, over the long term, impact our net revenues.
However, the time frame for completion and corresponding revenue recognition
of transactions in our backlog varies based on the nature of the assignment,
as certain transactions may remain in our backlog for longer periods of time.
In addition, our backlog is subject to certain limitations, such as
assumptions about the likelihood that individual client transactions will
occur in the future. Transactions may be cancelled or modified, and
transactions not included in the estimate may also occur.

Global Markets

Our Global Markets segment consists of:

FICC.

FICC generates revenues from intermediation and financing activities.

FICC intermediation.

Includes client execution activities related to making markets in both cash
and derivative instruments, as detailed below.  

Interest Rate Products.

Government bonds (including inflation-linked securities) across maturities,
other government-backed securities, and interest rate swaps, options and other
derivatives.

Credit Products.

Investment-grade and high-yield corporate securities, credit derivatives,
exchange-traded funds (ETFs), bank and bridge loans, municipal securities,
emerging market and distressed debt, and trade claims.

Mortgages.

Commercial mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives, residential
mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives (including U.S. government
agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations and other securities and
loans), and other asset-backed securities, loans and derivatives.

Currencies.

Currency options, spot/forwards and other derivatives on

G-10

currencies and emerging-market products.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Commodities.

Commodity derivatives and, to a lesser extent, physical commodities, involving
crude oil and petroleum products, natural gas, agricultural, base, precious
and other metals, electricity, including renewable power, environmental
products and other commodity products.

For further information about market-making activities, see “Market-Making
Activities” below.

FICC financing.

Includes providing financing to our clients through warehouse loans backed by
mortgages (including residential and commercial mortgage loans), corporate
loans and consumer loans (including auto loans and private student loans). We
also provide financing to clients through structured credit, asset-backed
lending, and through securities purchased under agreements to resell (resale
agreements).  

Equities.

Equities generates revenues from intermediation and financing activities.

Equities intermediation.

We make markets in equity securities and equity-related products, including
ETFs, convertible securities, options, futures and OTC derivative instruments.
We also structure and make markets in derivatives on indices, industry
sectors, financial measures and individual company stocks. Our exchange-based
market-making activities include making markets in stocks and ETFs, futures
and options on major exchanges worldwide. In addition, we generate commissions
and fees from executing and clearing institutional client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide, as well as OTC
transactions. For further information about market-making activities, see
“Market-Making Activities” below.  

Equities financing.

Includes prime brokerage and other equities financing activities, including
securities lending, margin lending and swaps. We earn fees by providing
clearing, settlement and custody services globally. We provide services that
principally involve borrowing and lending securities to cover institutional
clients’ short sales and borrowing securities to cover our short sales and to
make deliveries into the market. In addition, we are an active participant in

broker-to-broker

securities lending and third-party agency lending activities. We provide
financing to our clients for their securities trading activities through
margin loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or other acceptable
collateral. In addition, we execute swap transactions to provide our clients
with exposure to securities and indices.  

Market-Making Activities

As a market maker, we facilitate transactions in both liquid and less liquid
markets, primarily for institutional clients, such as corporations, financial
institutions, investment funds and governments, to assist clients in meeting
their investment objectives and in managing their risks. In this role, we seek
to earn the difference between the price at which a market participant is
willing to sell an instrument to us and the price at which another market
participant is willing to buy it from us, and vice versa (i.e., bid/offer
spread). In addition, we maintain (i) market-making positions, typically for a
short period of time, in response to, or in anticipation of, client demand,
and (ii) positions to actively manage our risk exposures that arise from these
market-making activities (collectively, inventory). Our inventory is recorded
in trading assets (long positions) or trading liabilities (short positions) in
our consolidated balance sheets.

Our results are influenced by a combination of interconnected drivers,
including (i) client activity levels and transactional bid/offer spreads
(collectively, client activity), and (ii) changes in the fair value of our
inventory and interest income and interest expense related to the holding,
hedging and funding of our inventory (collectively, market-making inventory
changes). Due to the integrated nature of our market-making activities,
disaggregation of net revenues into client activity and market-making
inventory changes is judgmental and has inherent complexities and limitations.

The amount and composition of our net revenues vary over time as these drivers
are impacted by multiple interrelated factors affecting economic and market
conditions, including volatility and liquidity in the market, changes in
interest rates, currency exchange rates, credit spreads, equity prices and
commodity prices, investor confidence, and other macroeconomic concerns and
uncertainties.

In general, assuming all other market-making conditions remain constant,
increases in client activity levels or bid/offer spreads tend to result in
increases in net revenues, and decreases tend to have the opposite effect.
However, changes in market-making conditions can materially impact client
activity levels and bid/offer spreads, as well as the fair value of our
inventory. For example, a decrease in liquidity in the market could have the
impact of (i) increasing our bid/offer spread, (ii) decreasing investor
confidence and thereby decreasing client activity levels, and (iii) widening
of credit spreads on our inventory positions.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents our Global Markets assets.

The table below presents our Global Markets operating results.

The table below presents our Global Markets net revenues by line item in the
consolidated statements of earnings.

In the table above:

The difference between commissions and fees and those in the consolidated
statements of earnings represents commissions and fees included in our
Consumer & Wealth Management segment.  

See “Net Revenues” for information about market making revenues, commissions
and fees, other principal transactions revenues and net interest income. See
Note 25 to the consolidated financial statements for net interest income by
segment.  

The primary driver of net revenues for FICC intermediation was client
activity.  

Operating Environment.

During 2021, Global Markets operated in an environment characterized by
continued economic recovery and continued monetary and fiscal support from
central banks and governments, which contributed to strong client activity
levels, although activity declined from a very strong prior year which
reflected heightened volatility and significant market dislocations as a
result of the

COVID-19

pandemic. In addition, global equity prices were generally higher compared
with the end of 2020, as the S&P 500 Index increased by 27% and the MSCI World
Index increased by 17%. Market volatility continued to moderate from elevated
levels last year, as the average daily VIX was 33% lower than 2020. If
macroeconomic conditions lead to a continued decline in activity levels or
continued decline in volatility, net revenues in Global Markets would likely
be negatively impacted.

2021 versus 2020.

Net revenues in Global Markets were $22.08 billion for 2021, 4% higher than

Net revenues in FICC were $10.58 billion, 9% lower than 2020, due to lower net
revenues in FICC intermediation, reflecting significantly lower net revenues
in interest rate products and credit products and slightly lower net revenues
in currencies, partially offset by significantly higher net revenues in
mortgages and higher net revenues in commodities. Net revenues in FICC
financing were significantly higher, reflecting significantly higher net
revenues from mortgage lending, partially offset by significantly lower net
revenues from resale agreements.

The decrease in FICC intermediation net revenues reflected strong but
significantly lower client activity compared with very strong activity levels
in the prior year due to high volatility amid the

COVID-19

pandemic. This was partially offset by the impact of improved market-making
conditions on our inventory compared with challenging conditions in the prior
year. The following provides information about our FICC intermediation net
revenues by business, compared with 2020 results:

Net revenues in interest rate products primarily reflected lower client
activity.  

Net revenues in credit products and currencies reflected lower client
activity, partially offset by the impact of improved market-making conditions
on our inventory.  

Net revenues in mortgages reflected the impact of improved market-making
conditions on our inventory.  

Net revenues in commodities primarily reflected higher client activity.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Net revenues in Equities were $11.49 billion, 20% higher than 2020, due to
significantly higher net revenues in Equities financing, primarily reflecting
increased activity (including higher average client balances), and higher net
revenues in Equities intermediation, across both derivatives and cash
products.

Provision for credit losses was $45 million for 2021, compared with $274
million for 2020, primarily reflecting reserve reductions in the current year
due to continued improvement in the broader economic environment following
challenging conditions in 2020 resulting from the

COVID-19

pandemic, partially offset by portfolio growth.

Operating expenses were $12.97 billion for 2021, essentially unchanged
compared with 2020, as higher compensation and benefits expenses (reflecting
strong performance) and higher transaction based expenses were offset by
significantly lower net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings.

Pre-tax

earnings were $9.06 billion, 12% higher than 2020. ROE was 15.3% for 2021,
compared with 14.1% for 2020 (which included the impact of net provisions for
litigation and regulatory proceedings that reduced ROE by 4.0 percentage
points).

Asset Management

We manage client assets across a broad range of investment strategies and
asset classes for a diverse set of institutional clients and a network of
third-party distributors around the world, including equity, fixed income and
alternative investments. We provide investment solutions including those
managed on a fiduciary basis by our portfolio managers, as well as those
managed by third-party managers. We offer our investment solutions in a
variety of structures, including separately managed accounts, mutual funds,
private partnerships and other commingled vehicles. These solutions begin with
identifying clients’ objectives and continue through portfolio construction,
ongoing asset allocation and risk management and investment realization.

In addition to managing client assets, we invest in alternative investments
across a range of asset classes that seek to deliver long-term accretive risk-
adjusted returns. Our investing activities, which are typically longer term,
include investments in corporate equity, credit, real estate and
infrastructure assets.

Asset Management generates revenues from the following:

Management and other fees.

The majority of revenues in management and other fees consists

of asset-based fees on client assets that we manage. For further information
about AUS, see “Assets Under Supervision” below. The fees that we charge vary
by asset class, distribution channel and the types of services provided, and
are affected by investment performance, as well as asset inflows and
redemptions.  

Incentive fees.

In certain circumstances, we also receive incentive fees based on a percentage
of a fund’s or a separately managed account’s return, or when the return
exceeds a specified benchmark or other performance targets. Such fees include
overrides, which consist of the increased share of the income and gains
derived primarily from our private equity and credit funds when the return on
a fund’s investments over the life of the fund exceeds certain threshold
returns.  

Equity investments.

Our alternative investing activities relate to public and private equity
investments in corporate, real estate and infrastructure entities. We also
make investments through consolidated investment entities (CIEs),
substantially all of which are engaged in real estate investment activities.  

Lending and debt investments.

We invest in corporate debt and provide financing for real estate and other
assets. These activities include investments in mezzanine debt, senior debt
and distressed debt securities.  

The table below presents our Asset Management assets.

The table below presents our Asset Management operating results.

The table below presents our Equity investments net revenues by equity type
and asset class.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents details about our Lending and debt investments net
revenues.

Operating Environment.

During 2021, the operating environment for Asset Management improved, as
global equity prices were generally higher and credit spreads tightened, amid
economic recovery and continued support from central banks and governments
globally. If optimism about the economic outlook declines or the ongoing
efforts to mitigate the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic are ineffective, it may lead to a decline in asset prices, widening
of credit spreads, and investors transitioning to asset classes that typically
generate lower fees or investors withdrawing their assets, and net revenues in
Asset Management would likely be negatively impacted.

2021 versus 2020.

Net revenues in Asset Management were $14.92 billion for 2021, 87% higher than
2020, primarily reflecting significantly higher net revenues in Equity
investments and Lending and debt investments.

The increase in Equity investments net revenues reflected significantly higher
net gains from investments in private equities, driven by company-specific
events and improved corporate performance compared with 2020, partially offset
by net losses from investments in public equities compared with significant
net gains in the prior year.

The increase in Lending and debt investments net revenues reflected net gains
from investments in debt instruments compared with net losses in the prior
year, and significantly higher net interest income.

Incentive fees were higher, primarily driven by harvesting, and Management and
other fees were slightly higher, reflecting the impact of higher average
assets under supervision, partially offset by higher fee waivers on money
market funds.

Provision for credit losses was $18 million for 2021, compared with $442
million for 2020, primarily due to reserve reductions in the current year
reflecting continued improvement in the broader economic environment following
challenging conditions in 2020 resulting from the

COVID-19

pandemic.

Operating expenses were $5.97 billion for 2021, 16% higher than 2020,
primarily due to significantly higher compensation and benefits expenses
(reflecting strong performance), partially offset by lower expenses related to
consolidated investments (including impairments).

Pre-tax

earnings were $8.93 billion for 2021, compared with $2.40 billion for 2020.
ROE was 28.0% for 2021, compared with 8.5% for 2020.

Consumer & Wealth Management

Consumer & Wealth Management helps clients achieve their individual financial
goals by providing a broad range of wealth advisory and banking services,
including financial planning, investment management, deposit-taking and
lending. Services are offered through our global network of advisors and via
our digital platforms.

Wealth Management.

Wealth management provides tailored wealth advisory services to clients across
the wealth spectrum. We operate globally serving individuals, families, family
offices, and foundations and endowments. Our relationships are established
directly or introduced through corporations that sponsor financial wellness
programs for their employees.

We offer personalized financial planning inclusive of income and liability
management, compensation and benefits analysis, trust and estate structuring,
tax optimization, philanthropic giving, and asset protection. We also provide
customized investment advisory solutions, and offer structuring and execution
capabilities in security and derivative products across all major global
markets. We leverage a broad, open-architecture investment platform and our
global execution capabilities to help clients achieve their investment goals.
In addition, we offer clients a full range of private banking services,
including a variety of deposit alternatives and loans that our clients use to
finance investments in both financial and nonfinancial assets, bridge cash
flow timing gaps or provide liquidity and flexibility for other needs.

Wealth management generates revenues from the following:

Management and other fees.

Includes fees related to managing assets, providing investing and wealth
advisory solutions, providing financial planning and counseling services via
Ayco Personal Financial Management, and executing brokerage transactions for
wealth management clients.  

Incentive fees.

In certain circumstances, we also receive incentive fees from wealth
management clients based on a percentage of a fund’s return, or when the
return exceeds a specified benchmark or other performance targets. Such fees
include overrides, which consist of the increased share of the income and
gains derived primarily from our private equity and credit funds when the
return on a fund’s investments over the life of the fund exceeds certain
threshold returns.  

Private banking and lending.

Includes net interest income allocated to deposit-taking and net interest
income earned on lending activities for wealth management clients.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Consumer Banking.

Our Consumer banking business issues unsecured loans, through our digital
platform,

Marcus by Goldman Sachs

(Marcus),

and credit cards, to finance the purchases of goods or services. We also
accept deposits (including savings and time deposits) through Marcus, in
Goldman Sachs Bank USA (GS Bank USA) and GSIB. Additionally, we provide
investing services through

Marcus Invest

to U.S. customers.

Consumer banking revenues consist of net interest income earned on unsecured
loans issued to consumers through Marcus and credit card lending activities,
and net interest income attributed to consumer deposits.

The table below presents our Consumer & Wealth Management assets.

The table below presents our Consumer & Wealth Management operating results.

Operating Environment.

During 2021, improved market and economic conditions contributed to a more
favorable backdrop for consumer banking and wealth management activities.
Global equity prices were generally higher and, in the U.S., unemployment
decreased and consumer spending increased compared with 2020, aided by
optimism about the economic recovery and continued support from central banks
and governments globally. If optimism about the economic outlook declines or
the ongoing efforts to mitigate the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic are ineffective, it may lead to a decline in asset prices, investors
favoring asset classes that typically generate lower fees, investors
withdrawing their assets and consumers withdrawing their deposits or
deterioration in consumer credit, net revenues and the provision for credit
losses in Consumer & Wealth Management would likely be negatively impacted.

2021 versus 2020.

Net revenues in Consumer & Wealth Management were $7.47 billion for 2021, 25%
higher than 2020.

Net revenues in Wealth management were $5.98 billion, 25% higher than 2020,
due to significantly higher Management and other fees, primarily reflecting
the impact of higher average assets under supervision, and significantly
higher net revenues in Private banking and lending, primarily reflecting
higher loan balances. In addition, Incentive fees were higher, primarily due
to harvesting.

Net revenues in Consumer banking were $1.49 billion, 23% higher than 2020,
reflecting higher credit card and deposit balances.

Provision for credit losses was $592 million for 2021, 22% lower than 2020,
primarily due to reserve reductions in the current year reflecting continued
improvement in the broader economic environment following challenging
conditions in 2020, partially offset by growth in credit card balances,
including approximately $185 million of provisions related to the commitment
to acquire the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio.

Operating expenses were $6.29 billion for 2021, 28% higher than 2020,
primarily reflecting significantly higher compensation and benefits expenses
(reflecting strong performance).

Pre-tax

earnings were $584 million for 2021, 73% higher than 2020. ROE was 4.0% for
2021, compared with 2.7% for 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Assets Under Supervision

AUS includes our institutional clients’ assets and assets sourced through
third-party distributors (both included in our Asset Management segment), as
well as

high-net-worth

clients’ assets (included in our Consumer & Wealth Management segment), where
we earn a fee for managing assets on a discretionary basis. This includes net
assets in our mutual funds, hedge funds, credit funds, private equity funds,
real estate funds, and separately managed accounts for institutional and
individual investors. AUS also includes client assets invested with third-
party managers, private bank deposits and advisory relationships where we earn
a fee for advisory and other services, but do not have investment discretion.
AUS does not include the self-directed brokerage assets of our clients.

The table below presents information about our firmwide

period-end

AUS by segment, asset class, distribution channel, region and vehicle.

In the table above:

Liquidity products includes money market funds and private bank deposits.  

EMEA represents Europe, Middle East and Africa.  

The table below presents changes in our AUS.

In the table above, total AUS net inflows/(outflows) for 2019 included $71
billion of inflows (substantially all in equity and fixed income assets) in
connection with the acquisitions of Standard & Poor’s Investment Advisory
Services (SPIAS), GS Personal Financial Management and Rocaton Investment
Advisors (Rocaton). SPIAS and Rocaton were included in the Asset Management
segment and GS Personal Financial Management was included in the Consumer &
Wealth Management segment.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents information about our average monthly firmwide AUS by
segment and asset class.

In addition to our AUS, we have discretion over alternative investments where
we currently do not earn management fees

(non-fee-earning

alternative assets).

We earn management fees on client assets that we manage and also receive
incentive fees based on a percentage of a fund’s or a separately managed
account’s return, or when the return exceeds a specified benchmark or other
performance targets. These incentive fees are recognized when it is probable
that a significant reversal of such fees will not occur. Our estimated
unrecognized incentive fees were $3.39 billion as of December 2021 and $1.79
billion as of December 2020. Such amounts are based on the completion of the
funds’ financial statements, which is generally one quarter in arrears. These
fees will be recognized, assuming no decline in fair value, if and when it is
probable that a significant reversal of such fees will not occur, which is
generally when such fees are no longer subject to fluctuations in the market
value of the assets.

Our firmwide management and other fees were $7.57 billion for 2021, $6.67
billion for 2020 and $6.08 billion for 2019. In the first quarter of 2022, we
announced that our target is to achieve management and other fees of more than
$10 billion (including more than $2 billion from alternative AUS) in 2024.

The table below presents our average effective management fee (which excludes

non-asset-based

fees) earned on our firmwide AUS.

The table below presents details about our monthly average AUS for alternative
investments and the average effective management fee we earned on such assets.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents information about our

period-end

AUS for alternative investments,

non-fee-earning

alternative investments and total alternative investments.

In the table above:

Corporate equity primarily includes private equity.  

Non-fee-earning

alternative investments primarily includes investments that we hold on our
balance sheet, our unfunded commitments, unfunded commitments of our clients
(where we do not charge fees on commitments), credit facilities collateralized
by fund assets and employee funds. Our calculation of

non-fee-earning

alternative investments may not be comparable to similar calculations used by
other companies.  

In the beginning of 2020, we announced a strategic objective of growing our
third-party alternatives business, and established a target of achieving gross
inflows of $150 billion for alternative investments by the end of 2024. In the
first quarter of 2022, we increased that target to $225 billion by the end of

The table below presents information about third-party commitments raised in
our alternatives business during 2020 and 2021.

$ in billions

As of

December 2021

Included in AUS

Included in

non-fee-earning

alternative assets

Third-party commitments raised

In the table above, commitments included in

non-fee-earning

alternative investments included approximately $29 billion which will begin to
earn fees (and become AUS), if and when the commitments are drawn and assets
are invested.

The table below presents information about alternative investments in our
Asset Management segment that we hold on our balance sheet.

Loans and Debt Securities.

The table below presents the concentration of loans and debt securities within
our alternative investments by accounting classification, region and industry.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Equity Securities.

The table below presents the concentration of equity securities within our
alternative investments by region and industry.

In the table above:

Equity securities included $15 billion as of December 2021 and $17 billion as
of December 2020 of private equity positions, and $4 billion as of December
2021 and $3 billion as of December 2020 of public equity positions that
converted from private equity upon the initial public offerings of the
underlying companies.  

The table below presents the concentration of equity securities within our
alternative investments by vintage.

As we continue to grow our third-party alternatives business, we remain
focused on our strategic objective to reduce the capital intensity of the
Asset Management segment by reducing our

on-balance

sheet equity investments.

The table below presents the rollforward of our equity securities within our
alternative investments from the beginning of 2020 through the end of 2021.

$ in billions

Total Equity

Beginning balance

Additions

Dispositions

Mark-ups

Ending balance

CIE Investments and Other.

CIE investments and other included assets held by CIEs of $14 billion as of
December 2021 and $19 billion as of December 2020, which were funded with
liabilities of approximately $7 billion as of December 2021 and $10 billion as
of December 2020. Substantially all such liabilities were nonrecourse, thereby
reducing our equity at risk.

The table below presents the concentration of CIE assets, net of financings,
within our alternative investments by region and asset class.

The table below presents the concentration of CIE assets, net of financings,
within our alternative investments by vintage.

Geographic Data

See Note 25 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of our
total net revenues,

pre-tax

earnings and net earnings by geographic region.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Balance Sheet and Funding Sources

Balance Sheet Management

One of our risk management disciplines is our ability to manage the size and
composition of our balance sheet. While our asset base changes due to client
activity, market fluctuations and business opportunities, the size and
composition of our balance sheet also reflects factors, including (i) our
overall risk tolerance, (ii) the amount of capital we hold and (iii) our
funding profile, among other factors. See “Capital Management and Regulatory
Capital — Capital Management” for information about our capital management
process.

Although our balance sheet fluctuates on a

day-to-day

basis, our total assets at

quarter-end

and

year-end

dates are generally not materially different from those occurring within our
reporting periods.

In order to ensure appropriate risk management, we seek to maintain a
sufficiently liquid balance sheet and have processes in place to dynamically
manage our assets and liabilities, which include (i) balance sheet planning,
(ii) balance sheet limits, (iii) monitoring of key metrics and (iv) scenario
analyses.

Balance Sheet Planning.

We prepare a balance sheet plan that combines our projected total assets and
composition of assets with our expected funding sources over a three-year time
horizon. This plan is reviewed quarterly and may be adjusted in response to
changing business needs or market conditions. The objectives of this planning
process are:

To develop our balance sheet projections, taking into account the general
state of the financial markets and expected business activity levels, as well
as regulatory requirements;  

To allow Treasury and our independent risk oversight and control functions to
objectively evaluate balance sheet limit requests from our revenue-producing
units in the context of our overall balance sheet constraints, including our
liability profile and capital levels, and key metrics; and  

To inform the target amount, tenor and type of funding to raise, based on our
projected assets and contractual maturities.  

Treasury and our independent risk oversight and control functions, along with
our revenue-producing units, review current and prior period information and
expectations for the year to prepare our balance sheet plan. The specific
information reviewed includes asset and liability size and composition, limit
utilization, risk and performance measures, and capital usage.

Our consolidated balance sheet plan, including our balance sheets by business,
funding projections and projected key metrics, is reviewed and approved by the
Firmwide Asset Liability Committee and the Risk Governance Committee. See
“Risk Management — Overview and Structure of Risk Management” for an overview
of our risk management structure.

Balance Sheet Limits.

The Firmwide Asset Liability Committee and the Risk Governance Committee have
the responsibility to review and approve balance sheet limits. These limits
are set at levels which are close to actual operating levels, rather than at
levels which reflect our maximum risk appetite, in order to ensure prompt
escalation and discussion among our revenue-producing units, Treasury and our
independent risk oversight and control functions on a routine basis. Requests
for changes in limits are evaluated after giving consideration to their impact
on our key metrics. Compliance with limits is monitored by our revenue-
producing units and Treasury, as well as our independent risk oversight and
control functions.

Monitoring of Key Metrics.

We monitor key balance sheet metrics both by business and on a consolidated
basis, including asset and liability size and composition, limit utilization
and risk measures. We attribute assets to businesses and review and analyze
movements resulting from new business activity, as well as market
fluctuations.

Scenario Analyses.

We conduct various scenario analyses, including as part of CCAR and U.S. Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act Stress Tests (DFAST), as
well as our resolution and recovery planning. See “Capital Management and
Regulatory Capital — Capital Management” for further information about these
scenario analyses. These scenarios cover short- and long-term time horizons
using various macroeconomic and firm-specific assumptions, based on a range of
economic scenarios. We use these analyses to assist us in developing our
longer-term balance sheet management strategy, including the level and
composition of assets, funding and capital. Additionally, these analyses help
us develop approaches for maintaining appropriate funding, liquidity and
capital across a variety of situations, including a severely stressed
environment.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Balance Sheet Analysis and Metrics

As of December 2021, total assets in our consolidated balance sheets were
$1.46 trillion, an increase of $300.96 billion from December 2020, primarily
reflecting increases in collateralized agreements of $134.25 billion
(primarily reflecting the impact of our and our clients’ activities), cash and
cash equivalents of $105.19 billion (primarily reflecting our activity), loans
of $42.45 billion (reflecting increases across the portfolio), and customer
and other receivables of $39.34 billion (primarily reflecting client
activity).

As of December 2021, total liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets were
$1.35 trillion, an increase of $286.97 billion from December 2020, primarily
reflecting increases in deposits of $104.27 billion (reflecting increases
across channels), customer and other payables of $61.27 billion (primarily
reflecting client activity), collateralized financings of $56.99 billion
(primarily reflecting the impact of our and our clients’ activities),
unsecured borrowings of $34.70 billion (primarily driven by new issuances
partially offset by maturities), and trading liabilities of $27.70 billion
(primarily reflecting the impact of our and our clients’ activities in
government obligations, and corporate and other debt obligations, partially
offset by the impact of interest rates, currency and commodity price movements
on derivative instruments).

Our total securities sold under agreements to repurchase (repurchase
agreements), accounted for as collateralized financings, were $165.88 billion
as of December 2021 and $126.57 billion as of December 2020, which were 3%
higher as of December 2021 and 24% higher as of December 2020 than the average
daily amount of repurchase agreements over the respective quarters, and 14%
higher as of December 2021 and 31% higher as of December 2020 than the average
daily amount of repurchase agreements over the respective years. As of
December 2021, the increase in our repurchase agreements relative to the
average daily amount of repurchase agreements during the quarter and year
resulted from higher levels of our and our clients’ activities at the end of
the period.

The level of our repurchase agreements fluctuates between and within periods,
primarily due to providing clients with access to highly liquid collateral,
such as certain government and agency obligations, through collateralized
financing activities.

The table below presents information about our balance sheet and leverage
ratios.

In the table above:

The leverage ratio equals total assets divided by total shareholders’ equity
and measures the proportion of equity and debt we use to finance assets. This
ratio is different from the leverage ratios included in Note 20 to the
consolidated financial statements.  

The

debt-to-equity

ratio equals unsecured long-term borrowings divided by total shareholders’
equity.  

The table below presents information about our shareholders’ equity and book
value per common share, including the reconciliation of common shareholders’
equity to tangible common shareholders’ equity.

In the table above:

Tangible common shareholders’ equity is calculated as total shareholders’
equity less preferred stock, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. We
believe that tangible common shareholders’ equity is meaningful because it is
a measure that we and investors use to assess capital adequacy. Tangible
common shareholders’ equity is a

non-GAAP

measure and may not be comparable to similar

non-GAAP

measures used by other companies.  

Book value per common share and tangible book value per common share are based
on common shares outstanding and restricted stock units granted to employees
with no future service requirements and not subject to performance or market
conditions (collectively, basic shares) of 348.9 million as of December 2021
and 358.8 million as of December 2020. We believe that tangible book value per
common share (tangible common shareholders’ equity divided by basic shares) is
meaningful because it is a measure that we and investors use to assess capital
adequacy. Tangible book value per common share is a

non-GAAP

measure and may not be comparable to similar

non-GAAP

measures used by other companies.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Funding Sources

Our primary sources of funding are deposits, collateralized financings,
unsecured short- and long-term borrowings, and shareholders’ equity. We seek
to maintain broad and diversified funding sources globally across products,
programs, markets, currencies and creditors to avoid funding concentrations.

The table below presents information about our funding sources.

Our funding is primarily raised in U.S. dollar, Euro, British pound and
Japanese yen. We generally distribute our funding products through our own
sales force and third-party distributors to a large, diverse creditor base in
a variety of markets in the Americas, Europe and Asia. We believe that our
relationships with our creditors are critical to our liquidity. Our creditors
include banks, governments, securities lenders, corporations, pension funds,
insurance companies, mutual funds and individuals. We have imposed various
internal guidelines to monitor creditor concentration across our funding
programs.

Deposits.

Our deposits provide us with a diversified source of funding and reduce our
reliance on wholesale funding. We raise deposits, including savings, demand
and time deposits, from private bank clients, consumers, transaction banking
clients, other institutional clients, and through internal and third-party
broker-dealers. Substantially all of our deposits are raised through GS Bank
USA and GSIB. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further
information about our deposits, including a maturity profile of our time
deposits.

Secured Funding.

We fund a significant amount of inventory and a portion of investments on a
secured basis. Secured funding includes collateralized financings in the
consolidated balance sheets. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial
statements for further information about our collateralized financings,
including its maturity profile. We may also pledge our inventory and
investments as collateral for securities borrowed under a securities lending
agreement. We also use our own inventory and investments to cover transactions
in which we or our clients have sold securities that have not yet been
purchased. Secured funding is less sensitive to changes in our credit quality
than unsecured funding, due to our posting of collateral to our lenders.
Nonetheless, we analyze the refinancing risk of our secured funding
activities, taking into account trade tenors, maturity profiles, counterparty
concentrations, collateral eligibility and counterparty rollover
probabilities. We seek to mitigate our refinancing risk by executing term
trades with staggered maturities, diversifying counterparties, raising excess
secured funding and

pre-funding

residual risk through our GCLA.

We seek to raise secured funding with a term appropriate for the liquidity of
the assets that are being financed, and we seek longer maturities for secured
funding collateralized by asset classes that may be harder to fund on a
secured basis, especially during times of market stress. Our secured funding,
excluding funding collateralized by liquid government and agency obligations,
is primarily executed for tenors of one month or greater and is primarily
executed through term repurchase agreements and securities loaned contracts.

Assets that may be harder to fund on a secured basis during times of market
stress include certain financial instruments in the following categories:
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities,

non-investment-grade

corporate debt securities, equity securities and emerging market securities.

We also raise financing through other types of collateralized financings, such
as secured loans and notes. GS Bank USA has access to funding from the Federal
Home Loan Bank. Our outstanding borrowings against the Federal Home Loan Bank
were $100 million as of December 2021 and we had no outstanding borrowings as
of December 2020. Additionally, we have access to funding through the Federal
Reserve discount window. However, we do not rely on this funding in our
liquidity planning and stress testing.

Unsecured Short-Term Borrowings.

A significant portion of our unsecured short-term borrowings was originally
long-term debt that is scheduled to mature within one year of the reporting
date. We use unsecured short-term borrowings, including U.S. and

non-U.S.

hybrid financial instruments and commercial paper, to finance liquid assets
and for other cash management purposes. In accordance with regulatory
requirements, Group Inc. does not issue debt with an original maturity of less
than one year, other than to its subsidiaries. See Note 14 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about our unsecured short-term
borrowings.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Unsecured Long-Term Borrowings.

Unsecured long-term borrowings, including structured notes, are raised through
syndicated U.S. registered offerings, U.S. registered and Rule 144A medium-
term note programs, offshore medium-term note offerings and other debt
offerings. We issue in different tenors, currencies and products to maximize
the diversification of our investor base.

The table below presents our quarterly unsecured long-term borrowings maturity
profile.

The weighted average maturity of our unsecured long-term borrowings as of
December 2021 was approximately seven years. To mitigate refinancing risk, we
seek to limit the principal amount of debt maturing over the course of any
monthly, quarterly or annual time horizon. We enter into interest rate swaps
to convert a portion of our unsecured long-term borrowings into floating-rate
obligations to manage our exposure to interest rates. See Note 14 to the
consolidated financial statements for further information about our unsecured
long-term borrowings. We issued approximately $60 billion of benchmark debt
during 2021 to support the growth in our total assets amid client demand and
attractive return opportunities. We intend to issue significantly less
benchmark debt in 2022 compared to our benchmark debt issuance in 2021, though
actual issuances may differ due to business needs and market opportunities.

Shareholders’ Equity.

Shareholders’ equity is a stable and perpetual source of funding. See Note 19
to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our
shareholders’ equity.

Capital Management and Regulatory Capital

Capital adequacy is of critical importance to us. We have in place a
comprehensive capital management policy that provides a framework, defines
objectives and establishes guidelines to assist us in maintaining the
appropriate level and composition of capital in both

business-as-usual

and stressed conditions.

Capital Management

We determine the appropriate amount and composition of our capital by
considering multiple factors, including our current and future regulatory
capital requirements, the results of our capital planning and stress testing
process, the results of resolution capital models and other factors, such as
rating agency guidelines, subsidiary capital requirements, the business
environment and conditions in the financial markets.

We manage our capital requirements and the levels of our capital usage
principally by setting limits on the balance sheet and/or limits on risk, in
each case at both the firmwide and business levels.

We principally manage the level and composition of our capital through
issuances and repurchases of our common stock.

We may issue, redeem or repurchase our preferred stock, junior subordinated
debt issued to trusts and other subordinated debt or other forms of capital as
business conditions warrant. Prior to such redemptions or repurchases, we must
receive approval from the FRB. See Notes 14 and 19 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about our preferred stock, junior
subordinated debt issued to trusts and other subordinated debt.

Capital Planning and Stress Testing Process.

As part of capital planning, we project sources and uses of capital given a
range of business environments, including stressed conditions. Our stress
testing process is designed to identify and measure material risks associated
with our business activities, including market risk, credit risk, operational
risk and liquidity risk, as well as our ability to generate revenues.

Our capital planning process incorporates an internal capital adequacy
assessment with the objective of ensuring that we are appropriately
capitalized relative to the risks in our businesses. We incorporate stress
scenarios into our capital planning process with a goal of holding sufficient
capital to ensure we remain adequately capitalized after experiencing a severe
stress event. Our assessment of capital adequacy is viewed in tandem with our
assessment of liquidity adequacy and is integrated into our overall risk
management structure, governance and policy framework.

Our stress tests incorporate our internally designed stress scenarios,
including our internally developed severely adverse scenario, and those
required by the FRB, and are designed to capture our specific vulnerabilities
and risks. We provide further information about our stress test processes and
a summary of the results on our website as described in “Business — Available
Information” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K.

As required by the FRB’s CCAR rules, we submit an annual capital plan for
review by the FRB. The purpose of the FRB’s review is to ensure that we have a
robust, forward-looking capital planning process that accounts for our unique
risks and that permits continued operation during times of economic and
financial stress.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The FRB evaluates us based, in part, on whether we have the capital necessary
to continue operating under the baseline and severely adverse scenarios
provided by the FRB and those developed internally. This evaluation also takes
into account our process for identifying risk, our controls and governance for
capital planning, and our guidelines for making capital planning decisions. In
addition, the FRB evaluates our plan to make capital distributions (i.e.,
dividend payments and repurchases or redemptions of stock, subordinated debt
or other capital securities) and issue capital, across the range of
macroeconomic scenarios and firm-specific assumptions. The FRB determines the
SCB applicable to us based on its own annual stress test. The SCB under the
Standardized approach is calculated as (i) the difference between our starting
and minimum projected CET1 capital ratios under the supervisory severely
adverse scenario and (ii) our planned common stock dividends for each of the
fourth through seventh quarters of the planning horizon, expressed as a
percentage of risk-weighted assets (RWAs).

We submitted our 2021 CCAR capital plan in April 2021 and published a summary
of our annual DFAST results in June 2021. See “Business — Available
Information” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K.

Based on our 2021 CCAR submission, the FRB reduced our SCB from 6.6% to 6.4%,
resulting in a Standardized CET1 capital ratio requirement of 13.4% for the
period from October 1, 2021 through September 30, 2022. See “Share Repurchase
Program” for further information about common stock repurchases and dividends.

GS Bank USA has its own capital planning process and, starting in 2022, will
be required to submit its annual stress test results to the FRB. GSI, GSIB and
Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE (GSBE) also have their own capital planning and
stress testing processes, which incorporate internally designed stress tests
developed in accordance with the guidelines of their respective regulators.

Contingency Capital Plan.

As part of our comprehensive capital management policy, we maintain a
contingency capital plan. Our contingency capital plan provides a framework
for analyzing and responding to a perceived or actual capital deficiency,
including, but not limited to, identification of drivers of a capital
deficiency, as well as mitigants and potential actions. It outlines the
appropriate communication procedures to follow during a crisis period,
including internal dissemination of information, as well as timely
communication with external stakeholders.

Capital Attribution.

We assess each of our businesses’ capital usage based on our internal
assessment of risks, which incorporates an attribution of our relevant
regulatory capital requirements. These regulatory capital requirements are
allocated using our attributed equity framework, which takes into
consideration our most binding capital constraints. Our most binding capital
constraint is based on the results of the FRB’s annual stress test, which
includes the Standardized risk-based capital and leverage ratios.

We review and make any necessary adjustments to our attributed equity in
January each year, to reflect, among other things, the results of our latest
CCAR process, as well as projected changes in our balance sheet. On January 1,
2021, our allocation of attributed equity changed (relative to the allocation
as of December 2020) as follows: attributed equity increased by approximately
$3.7 billion for Asset Management and approximately $0.7 billion for Consumer
& Wealth Management, while attributed equity decreased by approximately $2.3
billion for Global Markets and approximately $2.1 billion for Investment
Banking. On January 1, 2022, our allocation of attributed equity changed
(relative to the allocation as of December 2021) as follows: attributed equity
increased by approximately $1.0 billion for Consumer & Wealth Management and
approximately $0.5 billion for Investment Banking, while attributed equity
decreased by approximately $0.8 billion for Global Markets and approximately
$0.7 billion for Asset Management. See “Segment Assets and Operating Results —
Segment Operating Results” for information about our average quarterly
attributed equity by segment.

Share Repurchase Program.

We use our share repurchase program to help maintain the appropriate level of
common equity. The repurchase program is effected primarily through regular
open-market purchases (which may include repurchase plans designed to comply
with

Rule 10b5-1

and accelerated share repurchases), the amounts and timing of which are
determined primarily by our current and projected capital position and our
capital plan submitted to the FRB as part of CCAR. The amounts and timing of
the repurchases may also be influenced by general market conditions and the
prevailing price and trading volumes of our common stock.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

In the third quarter of 2021, the Board of Directors of Group Inc. (Board)
approved an increase in our common stock dividend from $1.25 to $2.00 per
share. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we returned a total of $1.20 billion
to shareholders, including common stock repurchases of $500 million and
approximately $700 million in common stock dividends. We currently expect our
common stock repurchases in the first quarter of 2022 to be at or around the
levels of common stock repurchases in the fourth quarter of 2021. Consistent
with our capital management philosophy, we will continue prioritizing
deployment of capital for our clients where returns are attractive and return
any excess capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases.

As of December 2021, the remaining share authorization under our existing
repurchase program was 34.4 million shares. See “Market for Registrant’s
Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities” in Part II, Item 5 of this

Form 10-K

and Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about our share repurchase program, and see above for information about our
capital planning and stress testing process.

Resolution Capital Models.

In connection with our resolution planning efforts, we have established a
Resolution Capital Adequacy and Positioning framework, which is designed to
ensure that our major subsidiaries (GS Bank USA, Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC
(GS&Co.), GSI, GSIB, GSBE, Goldman Sachs Japan Co., Ltd. (GSJCL), Goldman
Sachs Asset Management, L.P. and Goldman Sachs Asset Management International)
have access to sufficient loss-absorbing capacity (in the form of equity,
subordinated debt and unsecured senior debt) so that they are able to wind-
down following a Group Inc. bankruptcy filing in accordance with our preferred
resolution strategy.

In addition, we have established a triggers and alerts framework, which is
designed to provide the Board with information needed to make an informed
decision on whether and when to commence bankruptcy proceedings for Group Inc.

Rating Agency Guidelines

The credit rating agencies assign credit ratings to the obligations of Group
Inc., which directly issues or guarantees substantially all of our senior
unsecured debt obligations. GS&Co. and GSI have been assigned long- and short-
term issuer ratings by certain credit rating agencies. GS Bank USA, GSIB and
GSBE have also been assigned long- and short-term issuer ratings, as well as
ratings on their long- and short-term bank deposits. In addition, credit
rating agencies have assigned ratings to debt obligations of certain other
subsidiaries of Group Inc.

The level and composition of our capital are among the many factors considered
in determining our credit ratings. Each agency has its own definition of
eligible capital and methodology for evaluating capital adequacy, and
assessments are generally based on a combination of factors rather than a
single calculation. See “Risk Management — Liquidity Risk Management — Credit
Ratings” for further information about credit ratings of Group Inc., GS Bank
USA, GSIB, GSBE, GS&Co. and GSI.

Consolidated Regulatory Capital

We are subject to consolidated regulatory capital requirements which are
calculated in accordance with the regulations of the FRB (Capital Framework).
Under the Capital Framework, we are an “Advanced approach” banking
organization and have been designated as a global systemically important bank

(G-SIB).

The capital requirements calculated under the Capital Framework include the
capital conservation buffer requirements, which are comprised of a 2.5% buffer
(under the Advanced Capital Rules), the SCB (under the Standardized Capital
Rules), a countercyclical capital buffer (under both Capital Rules) and the

G-SIB

surcharge (under both Capital Rules). Our

G-SIB

surcharge is 2.5% for 2021 and 2022 and 3.0% for 2023. Based on financial data
for 2021, we are above the threshold for the 3.5%

G-SIB

surcharge. The earliest this surcharge could be effective is January 2024. The

G-SIB

surcharge and countercyclical capital buffer in the future may differ due to
additional guidance from our regulators and/or positional changes, and our SCB
is likely to change from year to year based on the results of the annual
supervisory stress tests. Our target is to maintain capital ratios equal to
the regulatory requirements plus a buffer of 50 to 100 basis points.

See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about our risk-based capital ratios and leverage ratios, and the Capital
Framework.

Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC)

We are also subject to the FRB’s TLAC and related requirements. Failure to
comply with the TLAC and related requirements would result in restrictions
being imposed by the FRB and could limit our ability to repurchase shares, pay
dividends and make certain discretionary compensation payments.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents TLAC and external long-term debt requirements.

In the table above:

The TLAC to leverage exposure requirement includes (i) the 7.5% minimum and
(ii) the 2.0% leverage exposure buffer.  

The external long-term debt to RWAs requirement includes (i) the 6% minimum
and (ii) the 2.5%

G-SIB

surcharge (Method 2).  

The external long-term debt to total leverage exposure is the 4.5% minimum.  

The table below presents information about our TLAC and external long-term
debt ratios.

In the table above:

TLAC includes common and preferred stock, and eligible long-term debt issued
by Group Inc. Eligible long-term debt represents unsecured debt, which has a
remaining maturity of at least one year and satisfies additional requirements.  

External long-term debt consists of eligible long-term debt subject to a
haircut if it is due to be paid between one and two years.  

RWAs represent Standardized RWAs as of December 2021 and Advanced RWAs as of
December 2020. In accordance with the TLAC rules, the higher of Advanced or
Standardized RWAs are used in the calculation of TLAC and external long-term
debt ratios and applicable requirements.  

Leverage exposure consists of average adjusted total assets and certain

off-balance

sheet exposures. Leverage exposure for the three months ended December 2020
excluded average holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and average deposits at
the Federal Reserve

as permitted by the FRB under a temporary amendment. This temporary amendment
had the effect of increasing the TLAC to leverage exposure ratio and the
external long-term debt to leverage ratio. The impact of this temporary
amendment was an increase to the TLAC to leverage exposure ratio of 2.4
percentage points and the external long-term debt to leverage exposure ratio
of 1.3 percentage points for the three months ended December 2020. The
amendment permitting this exclusion expired on April 1, 2021.  

See “Business — Regulation” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about TLAC.

Subsidiary Capital Requirements

Many of our subsidiaries, including our bank and broker-dealer subsidiaries,
are subject to separate regulation and capital requirements of the
jurisdictions in which they operate.

Bank Subsidiaries.

GS Bank USA is our primary U.S. banking subsidiary and GSIB and GSBE are our
primary

non-U.S.

banking subsidiaries. These entities are subject to regulatory capital
requirements. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for further
information about the regulatory capital requirements of our bank
subsidiaries.

U.S. Regulated Broker-Dealer Subsidiaries.

GS&Co. is our primary U.S. regulated broker-dealer subsidiary and is subject
to regulatory capital requirements, including those imposed by the SEC and the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc. In addition, GS&Co. is a
registered futures commission merchant and a registered swap dealer with the
CFTC, and therefore is subject to regulatory capital requirements imposed by
the CFTC, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the National Futures
Association. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, GS&Co. also became a
registered security-based swap dealer with the SEC, and therefore became
subject to capital requirements for security-based swap dealers which became
effective in October 2021.

Rule 15c3-1

of the SEC and Rules 1.17 and Part 23 Subpart E of the CFTC specify uniform
minimum net capital requirements, as defined, for their registrants, and also
effectively require that a significant part of the registrants’ assets be kept
in relatively liquid form. GS&Co. has elected to calculate its minimum capital
requirements in accordance with the “Alternative Net Capital Requirement” as
permitted by

Rule 15c3-1

of the SEC.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

GS&Co. had regulatory net capital, as defined by

Rule 15c3-1,

of $22.18 billion as of December 2021 and $22.38 billion as of December 2020,
which exceeded the amount required by $17.74 billion as of December 2021 and
$18.45 billion as of December 2020. In addition to its alternative minimum net
capital requirements, GS&Co. is also required to hold tentative net capital in
excess of $5 billion and net capital in excess of $1 billion in accordance
with

Rule 15c3-1.

GS&Co. is also required to notify the SEC in the event that its tentative net
capital is less than $6 billion. As of both December 2021 and December 2020,
GS&Co. had tentative net capital and net capital in excess of both the minimum
and the notification requirements.

Non-U.S.

Regulated Broker-Dealer Subsidiaries.

Our principal

non-U.S.

regulated broker-dealer subsidiaries include GSI and GSJCL.

GSI, our U.K. broker-dealer, is regulated by the Prudential Regulation
Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA).

GSI is subject to the U.K. capital framework, which is predominantly aligned
with the E.U. capital framework prescribed in the amended E.U. Capital
Requirements Directive (CRD) and the E.U. Capital Requirements Regulation
(CRR). These capital regulations are largely based on the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision’s (Basel Committee) capital framework for strengthening
international capital standards (Basel III).

The table below presents GSI’s risk-based capital requirements.

In the table above, the risk-based capital requirements incorporate capital
guidance received from the PRA and could change in the future.

The table below presents information about GSI’s risk-based capital ratios.

In the table above, the risk-based capital ratios as of December 2021
reflected GSI’s profits after foreseeable charges for the three months ended
December 2021 (which will not be finalized until verification by GSI’s
external auditors and approval by GSI’s Board of Directors for inclusion in
risk-based capital). These profits contributed approximately 16 basis points
to the CET1 capital ratio.

GSI is also subject to the leverage ratio framework established by the PRA.
This framework sets the minimum leverage ratio requirement at 3.25% that will
apply to GSI from January 1, 2023. GSI had a leverage ratio of 4.2% as of
December 2021 and 4.7% as of December 2020. The leverage ratio as of December
2021 reflected GSI’s profits after foreseeable charges for the three months
ended December 2021 (which will not be finalized until verification by GSI’s
external auditors and approval by GSI’s Board of Directors for inclusion in
risk-based capital). These profits contributed approximately 7 basis points to
the leverage ratio.

GSI is a registered swap dealer with the CFTC and, beginning in the fourth
quarter of 2021, also became a registered security-based swap dealer with the
SEC. As of December 2021, GSI was subject to and in compliance with applicable
capital requirements for swap dealers and security-based swap dealers.

GSI is also subject to a minimum requirement for own funds and eligible
liabilities issued to affiliates. This requirement is subject to a
transitional period which began to phase in from January 2019 and became fully
effective beginning in January 2022. As of both December 2021 and December
2020, GSI was in compliance with this requirement.

GSJCL, our Japanese broker-dealer, is regulated by Japan’s Financial Services
Agency. GSJCL and certain other

non-U.S.

subsidiaries are also subject to capital requirements promulgated by
authorities of the countries in which they operate. As of both December 2021
and December 2020, these subsidiaries were in compliance with their local
capital requirements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Regulatory and Other Matters

Regulatory Matters

Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and supervision worldwide.
Regulations have been adopted or are being considered by regulators and policy
makers worldwide. Given that many of the new and proposed rules are highly
complex, the full impact of regulatory reform will not be known until the
rules are implemented and market practices develop under the final
regulations.

See “Business — Regulation” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about the laws, rules and regulations and proposed
laws, rules and regulations that apply to us and our operations.

Other Matters

Replacement of Interbank Offered Rates (IBORs), including LIBOR.

On January 1, 2022, the publication of all EUR, CHF, JPY and GBP LIBOR

(non-USD

LIBOR) settings along with certain USD LIBOR settings ceased. The publication
of the most commonly used USD LIBOR settings will cease after June 2023. The
FCA has allowed the publication and use of synthetic rates for certain GBP and
JPY LIBOR settings in legacy GBP or JPY LIBOR-based derivative contracts
through December 2022. The U.S. federal banking agencies’ guidance strongly
encourages banking organizations to cease using USD LIBOR.

The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) 2020 IBOR Fallbacks
Protocol (IBOR Protocol) has provided derivatives market participants with
amended fallbacks for legacy and new derivative contracts to mitigate legal or
economic uncertainty. Both counterparties have to adhere to the IBOR Protocol
or engage in bilateral amendments for the terms to be effective for derivative
contracts. ISDA confirmed that the FCA’s formal announcement in March 2021
fixed the spread adjustment for all LIBOR rates and that fallbacks will
automatically occur for outstanding derivative contracts that incorporate the
relevant terms. In April 2021, the State of New York approved legislation
intended to minimize legal and economic uncertainty for contracts that are
governed by New York law and have no fallback provisions or have fallback
provisions that are based on USD LIBOR by providing a statutory framework to
replace USD LIBOR with a benchmark rate based on the Secured Overnight
Financing Rate (SOFR).

We have facilitated an orderly transition from

non-USD

LIBORs to alternative risk-free reference rates for us and our clients and
continue to make progress on our transition program as it relates to USD
LIBOR.

Our

non-USD

LIBOR risk exposure was substantially all in connection with derivative
contracts. As of December 2021, substantially all of our

non-USD

LIBOR-based derivative contracts were with central clearing counterparties or
exchanges which had incorporated fallbacks consistent with the IBOR Protocol
in their rulebooks or were under bilateral agreements subject to the IBOR
Protocol. The remainder were converted to synthetic rates as permitted by the
FCA. The notional amount of derivatives converted to synthetic rates was not
material.

Our risk exposure to USD LIBOR is primarily in connection with our derivative
contracts and to a lesser extent our unsecured debt, preferred stock and loan
portfolio. As of December 2021, the notional amount of our USD LIBOR-based
derivative contracts was approximately $10.0 trillion, of which approximately
$5.5 trillion will mature after June 2023 based on their contractual terms. A
majority of such derivative contracts are with counterparties under bilateral
agreements subject to the IBOR Protocol, or with central clearing
counterparties or exchanges which have incorporated fallbacks consistent with
the IBOR Protocol in their rulebooks and have announced that they plan to
convert USD LIBOR contracts to alternative risk-free reference rates. Our
benchmark unsecured debt and preferred stock with USD LIBOR exposure was
approximately $34.5 billion as of December 2021, of which $29.4 billion will
contractually mature after June 2023 or is perpetual and has no stated
maturity date. A large portion of such debt and preferred stock represents our

fixed-to-floating

rate instruments, currently in the fixed-rate period, with call options before
the LIBOR exposure begins. We continue to monitor industry and legislative
developments as they relate to unsecured debt and preferred stock and will
take actions designed to facilitate an orderly transition. In addition, we are
also engaging with our clients in order to remediate our loan agreements
through bilateral amendments.

We have also issued debt and deposits linked to SOFR and Sterling Overnight
Index Average (SONIA) and executed SOFR- and SONIA-based derivative contracts
to make markets and facilitate client activities. When appropriate, we
continue to execute transactions in the market to reduce our USD LIBOR
exposures arising from hedges to our fixed-rate debt issuances and replace
them with alternative risk-free reference rate exposures.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Our LIBOR transition program continues to make progress with a focus on:

Evaluating and monitoring the impacts of USD LIBOR settings across our
businesses, including transactions and products;  

Ensuring that legacy financial instruments and contracts that continue to be
impacted by the transition already contain appropriate fallback language or
are being amended, either through bilateral negotiation or using industry-wide
tools, such as protocols;  

Enhancements to infrastructure (for example, models and systems) to prepare
for a smooth transition from USD LIBOR to alternative risk-free reference
rates;  

Ensuring operational readiness to offer and support various alternative risk-
free reference rate products;  

Active participation in central bank and sector working groups, including
responding to industry consultations; and  

Client education and communication.  

Impact of

COVID-19

Pandemic.

Infection rates in many parts of the world spiked toward the end of 2021 and
into early 2022, as the highly transmissible Omicron variant emerged in the
fourth quarter and spread rapidly, while the Delta variant also remained a
concern. The surge of infections has led to a renewed emphasis globally on
safety measures and restrictions, as well as a greater sense of urgency
regarding the distribution of vaccines and vaccine boosters, and has created a
greater degree of uncertainty regarding the prospects for economic growth in

We have continued to successfully execute on our BCP strategy since initially
activating it in the first quarter of 2020 in response to the emergence of the

COVID-19

pandemic. Our priority has been to safeguard our employees and to seek to
ensure continuity of business operations on behalf of our clients. Our
business continuity response to the

COVID-19

pandemic is managed by a central team, which is led by our chief
administrative officer and chief medical officer, and includes senior
management within Risk and the chief operating officers across all regions and
businesses. We remain focused on ensuring that our employees are able to
safely work from our offices, where circumstances permit. During 2021, we made
substantial progress in facilitating the safe return of employees to our
offices and employees in a number of our locations around the world returned
to the office to varying degrees. Given that the situation regarding

COVID-19

is fluid and varies geographically, our approach to transitioning back to the
office is flexible and evolves as the specific conditions and requirements of
each location change. For instance, in light of the rapid spread of the
Omicron variant late in 2021, we took the step of having the vast majority of
employees in the U.S., the U.K. and in some of our other locations work
remotely at the outset of 2022.

Our systems and infrastructure have been robust throughout the

COVID-19

pandemic, enabling us to conduct our activities without disruption.
Communication throughout our organization has remained active during the
pandemic and our risk management processes have continued to operate in a
rigorous and disciplined manner.

We maintained high liquidity levels during 2021, as our GCLA averaged $335
billion for the year. We have continued to access our traditional funding
sources in the normal course and service our debt and other obligations on a
timely basis. See “Balance Sheet and Funding Sources” and “Risk Management —
Liquidity Risk Management” for further information.

Accounting estimates, particularly those made in connection with determining
the allowance for credit losses and the fair value of certain level 3 assets,
are sensitive to assumptions regarding future economic conditions. Predicting
the trajectory of the economic recovery is highly judgmental given the
uncertainty as to how the pandemic will evolve, as it will largely depend on
the duration of the Omicron wave, the possible emergence of other variants and
further progress in the distribution of vaccines and vaccine boosters.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

In general, the market backdrop continued to be constructive during 2021 and
activity levels remained solid. Volatility increased toward the end of the
year as a result of the spike in infections, while accelerating inflation,
driven by supply chain disruptions and labor shortages, and more moderated
growth expectations, were key macroeconomic considerations heading into 2022.
We continued to deploy our balance sheet to intermediate risk and to support
the needs of clients. We have maintained our proactive approach to managing
market risk levels, which entails ongoing review and monitoring of exposures
and focusing on ways to mitigate risk. As the economic recovery progressed in
2021, credit risk continued to abate from the low point of the pandemic.
However, we continue to closely monitor those industries that have been most
severely challenged by the pandemic.

While the global economy continued on the path to recovery during 2021, it is
vulnerable to the risk that the Omicron variant, or other possible variants,
could impede the recovery going forward by precipitating adverse economic
consequences, such as a softening in consumer and business confidence and
spending, a worsening of supply chain constraints, and an intensification of
inflationary pressures. If the future effects of the pandemic were to lead to
a sustained period of economic weakness, our businesses would be negatively
impacted. This would have a negative impact on factors that are important to
our operating performance, such as the level of client activity,
creditworthiness of counterparties and borrowers, and the amount of our AUS.
We will continue to closely monitor the rollout of vaccines across regions, as
well as the impact of new variants of the virus, and will take further
actions, as necessary, in order to best serve the interests of our employees,
clients and counterparties. For further information about the risks associated
with the

COVID-19

pandemic, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K.

Off-Balance

Sheet Arrangements

In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various types of

off-balance

sheet arrangements. Our involvement in these arrangements can take many
different forms, including:

Purchasing or retaining residual and other interests in special purpose
entities, such as mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securitization
vehicles;  

Holding senior and subordinated debt, interests in limited and general
partnerships, and preferred and common stock in other nonconsolidated
vehicles;  

Entering into interest rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit
derivatives, including total return swaps; and  

Providing guarantees, indemnifications, commitments, letters of credit and
representations and warranties.  

We enter into these arrangements for a variety of business purposes, including
securitizations. The securitization vehicles that purchase mortgages,
corporate bonds and other types of financial assets are critical to the
functioning of several significant investor markets, including the mortgage-
backed and other asset-backed securities markets, since they offer investors
access to specific cash flows and risks created through the securitization
process.

We also enter into these arrangements to underwrite client securitization
transactions; provide secondary market liquidity; make investments in
performing and nonperforming debt, distressed loans, power-related assets,
equity securities, real estate and other assets; and provide investors with
credit-linked and asset-repackaged notes.

The table below presents where information about our various

off-balance

sheet arrangements may be found in this

Form 10-K.

In addition, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for
information about our consolidation policies.

Off-Balance

Sheet Arrangement

Disclosure in

Form 10-K  

Variable interests and other obligations, including contingent obligations,
arising from variable interests in nonconsolidated variable interest entities
(VIEs)

See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements.  

Guarantees, and lending and other commitments

See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements.  

Derivatives

See “Risk Management — Credit Risk Management — Credit Exposures — OTC
Derivatives” and Notes 4, 5, 7 and 18 to the consolidated financial
statements.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Risk Management

Risks are inherent in our businesses and include liquidity, market, credit,
operational, model, legal, compliance, conduct, regulatory and reputational
risks. Our risks include the risks across our risk categories, regions or
global businesses, as well as those which have uncertain outcomes and have the
potential to materially impact our financial results, our liquidity and our
reputation. For further information about our risk management processes, see
“Overview and Structure of Risk Management,” and for information about our
areas of risk, see “Liquidity Risk Management,” “Market Risk Management,”
“Credit Risk Management,” “Operational Risk Management” and “Model Risk
Management” and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K.

Overview and Structure of Risk Management

Overview

We believe that effective risk management is critical to our success.
Accordingly, we have established an enterprise risk management framework that
employs a comprehensive, integrated approach to risk management, and is
designed to enable comprehensive risk management processes through which we
identify, assess, monitor and manage the risks we assume in conducting our
activities. Our risk management structure is built around three core
components: governance, processes and people.

Governance.

Risk management governance starts with the Board, which both directly and
through its committees, including its Risk Committee, oversees our risk
management policies and practices implemented through the enterprise risk
management framework. The Board is also responsible for the annual review and
approval of our risk appetite statement. The risk appetite statement describes
the levels and types of risk we are willing to accept or to avoid, in order to
achieve our objectives included in our strategic business plan, while
remaining in compliance with regulatory requirements. The Board reviews our
strategic business plan and is ultimately responsible for overseeing and
providing direction about our strategy and risk appetite.

The Board receives regular briefings on firmwide risks, including liquidity
risk, market risk, credit risk, operational risk and model risk, from our
independent risk oversight and control functions, including the chief risk
officer, and on compliance risk and conduct risk from Compliance, on legal and
regulatory enforcement matters from the chief legal officer, and on other
matters impacting our reputation from the chair of our Firmwide Client and
Business Standards Committee and our Firmwide Reputational Risk Committee. The
chief risk officer reports to our chief executive officer and to the Risk
Committee of the Board. As part of the review of the firmwide risk portfolio,
the chief risk officer regularly advises the Risk Committee of the Board of
relevant risk metrics and material exposures, including risk limits and
thresholds established in our risk appetite statement.

The implementation of our risk governance structure and core risk management
processes are overseen by Enterprise Risk, which reports to our chief risk
officer, and is responsible for ensuring that our enterprise risk management
framework provides the Board, our risk committees and senior management with a
consistent and integrated approach to managing our various risks in a manner
consistent with our risk appetite.

Our revenue-producing units, as well as Treasury, Engineering, Human Capital
Management, Operations, and Corporate and Workplace Solutions, are considered
our first line of defense. They are accountable for the outcomes of our risk-
generating activities, as well as for assessing and managing those risks
within our risk appetite.

Our independent risk oversight and control functions are considered our second
line of defense and provide independent assessment, oversight and challenge of
the risks taken by our first line of defense, as well as lead and participate
in risk committees. Independent risk oversight and control functions include
Compliance, Conflicts Resolution, Controllers, Legal, Risk and Tax.

Internal Audit is considered our third line of defense, and our director of
Internal Audit reports to the Audit Committee of the Board and
administratively to our chief executive officer. Internal Audit includes
professionals with a broad range of audit and industry experience, including
risk management expertise. Internal Audit is responsible for independently
assessing and validating the effectiveness of key controls, including those
within the risk management framework, and providing timely reporting to the
Audit Committee of the Board, senior management and regulators.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The three lines of defense structure promotes the accountability of first line
risk takers, provides a framework for effective challenge by the second line
and empowers independent review from the third line.

Processes.

We maintain various processes that are critical components of our risk
management framework, including (i) risk identification and assessment, (ii)
risk appetite, limit and threshold setting, (iii) risk reporting and
monitoring, and (iv) risk decision-making.

Risk Identification and Assessment.

We believe that the identification and assessment of our risks is a critical
step in providing our Board and senior management transparency and insight
into the range and materiality of our risks. We have a comprehensive data
collection process, including firmwide policies and procedures that require
all employees to report and escalate risk events. Our approach for risk
identification and assessment is comprehensive across all risk types, is
dynamic and forward-looking to reflect and adapt to our changing risk profile
and business environment, leverages subject matter expertise, and allows for
prioritization of our most critical risks.  

To effectively assess our risks, we maintain a daily discipline of marking
substantially all of our inventory to current market levels. We carry our
inventory at fair value, with changes in valuation reflected immediately in
our risk management systems and in net revenues. We do so because we believe
this discipline is one of the most effective tools for assessing and managing
risk and that it provides transparent and realistic insight into our inventory
exposures.

An important part of our risk management process is firmwide stress testing.
It allows us to quantify our exposure to tail risks, highlight potential loss
concentrations, undertake risk/reward analysis, and assess and mitigate our
risk positions. Firmwide stress tests are performed on a regular basis and are
designed to ensure a comprehensive analysis of our vulnerabilities and
idiosyncratic risks combining financial and nonfinancial risks, including, but
not limited to, credit, market, liquidity and funding, operational and
compliance, strategic, systemic and emerging risks into a single combined
scenario. We also perform ad hoc stress tests in anticipation of market events
or conditions. Stress tests are also used to assess capital adequacy as part
of our capital planning and stress testing process. See “Capital Management
and Regulatory Capital — Capital Management” for further information.

Risk Appetite, Limit and Threshold Setting.

We apply a rigorous framework of limits and thresholds to control and monitor
risk across transactions, products, businesses and markets. The Board,
directly or indirectly through its Risk Committee, approves limits and
thresholds included in our risk appetite statement at firmwide, business and
product levels. In addition, the Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee is
responsible for approving our risk limits framework, subject to the overall
limits approved by the Risk Committee of the Board, and monitoring these
limits.  

The Risk Governance Committee is responsible for approving limits at firmwide,
business and product levels. Certain limits may be set at levels that will
require periodic adjustment, rather than at levels that reflect our maximum
risk appetite. This fosters an ongoing dialogue about risk among our first and
second lines of defense, committees and senior management, as well as rapid
escalation of

risk-related

matters. Additionally, through delegated authority from the Risk Governance
Committee, Market Risk sets limits at certain product and desk levels, and
Credit Risk sets limits for individual counterparties, counterparties and
their subsidiaries, industries and countries. Limits are reviewed regularly
and amended on a permanent or temporary basis to reflect changing market
conditions, business conditions or risk tolerance.

Risk Reporting and Monitoring.

Effective risk reporting and risk decision-making depends on our ability to
get the right information to the right people at the right time. As such, we
focus on the rigor and effectiveness of our risk systems, with the objective
of ensuring that our risk management technology systems provide us with
complete, accurate and timely information. Our risk reporting and monitoring
processes are designed to take into account information about both existing
and emerging risks, thereby enabling our risk committees and senior management
to perform their responsibilities with the appropriate level of insight into
risk exposures. Furthermore, our limit and threshold breach processes provide
means for timely escalation. We evaluate changes in our risk profile and our
businesses, including changes in business mix or jurisdictions in which we
operate, by monitoring risk factors at a firmwide level.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Risk Decision-Making.

Our governance structure provides the protocol and responsibility for

decision-making

on risk management issues and ensures implementation of those decisions. We
make extensive use of risk committees that meet regularly and serve as an
important means to facilitate and foster ongoing discussions to manage and
mitigate risks.  

We maintain strong and proactive communication about risk and we have a
culture of collaboration in decision-making among our first and second lines
of defense, committees and senior management. While our first line of defense
is responsible for management of their risk, we dedicate extensive resources
to our second line of defense in order to ensure a strong oversight structure
and an appropriate segregation of duties. We regularly reinforce our strong
culture of escalation and accountability across all functions.

People.

Even the best technology serves only as a tool for helping to make informed
decisions in real time about the risks we are taking. Ultimately, effective
risk management requires our people to interpret our risk data on an ongoing
and timely basis and adjust risk positions accordingly. The experience of our
professionals, and their understanding of the nuances and limitations of each
risk measure, guides us in assessing exposures and maintaining them within
prudent levels.

We reinforce a culture of effective risk management, consistent with our risk
appetite, in our training and development programs, as well as in the way we
evaluate performance, and recognize and reward our people. Our training and
development programs, including certain sessions led by our most senior
leaders, are focused on the importance of risk management, client
relationships and reputational excellence. As part of our performance review
process, we assess reputational excellence, including how an employee
exercises good risk management and reputational judgment, and adheres to our
code of conduct and compliance policies. Our review and reward processes are
designed to communicate and reinforce to our professionals the link between
behavior and how people are recognized, the need to focus on our clients and
our reputation, and the need to always act in accordance with our highest
standards.

Structure

Ultimate oversight of risk is the responsibility of our Board. The Board
oversees risk both directly and through its committees, including its Risk
Committee. We have a series of committees with specific risk management
mandates that have oversight or decision-making responsibilities for risk
management activities. Committee membership generally consists of senior
managers from both our first and second lines of defense. We have established
procedures for these committees to ensure that appropriate information
barriers are in place. Our primary risk committees, most of which also have
additional

sub-committees,

councils or working groups, are described below. In addition to these
committees, we have other risk committees that provide oversight for different
businesses, activities, products, regions and entities. All of our committees
have responsibility for considering the impact on our reputation of the
transactions and activities that they oversee.

Membership of our risk committees is reviewed regularly and updated to reflect
changes in the responsibilities of the committee members. Accordingly, the
length of time that members serve on the respective committees varies as
determined by the committee chairs and based on the responsibilities of the
members.

The chart below presents an overview of our risk management governance
structure.

Management Committee.

The Management Committee oversees our global activities. It provides this
oversight directly and through authority delegated to committees it has
established. This committee consists of our most senior leaders, and is
chaired by our chief executive officer. Most members of the Management
Committee are also members of other committees. The following are the
committees that are principally involved in firmwide risk management.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee.

The Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee is responsible for overseeing all of
our financial and nonfinancial risks. As part of such oversight, the committee
is responsible for the ongoing review, approval and monitoring of our
enterprise risk management framework, as well as our risk limits framework.
This committee is

co-chaired

by our chief financial officer and our chief risk officer, who are appointed
as chairs by our chief executive officer, and reports to the Management
Committee. The following are the primary committees or councils that report to
the Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee:

Firmwide Risk Council.

The Firmwide Risk Council is responsible for the ongoing monitoring of
relevant financial risks and related risk limits at the firmwide, business and
product levels. This council is

co-chaired

by the chairs of the Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee.  

Firmwide New Activity Committee.

The Firmwide New Activity Committee is responsible for reviewing new
activities and for establishing a process to identify and review previously
approved activities that are significant and that have changed in complexity
and/or structure or present different reputational and suitability concerns
over time to consider whether these activities remain appropriate. This
committee is

co-chaired

by the controller and chief accounting officer, and our chief administrative
officer, who are appointed as chairs by the chairs of the Firmwide Enterprise
Risk Committee.  

Firmwide Operational Risk and Resilience Committee.

The Firmwide Operational Risk and Resilience Committee is responsible for
overseeing operational risk, and for ensuring our business and operational
resilience. To assist the Firmwide Operational Risk and Resilience Committee
in carrying out its mandate, other risk committees with dedicated oversight
for technology-related risks, including cyber security matters, report into
the Firmwide Operational Risk and Resilience Committee. This committee is

co-chaired

by our chief administrative officer and the head of Operational Risk, who are
appointed as chairs by the chairs of the Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee.  

Firmwide Conduct Committee.

The Firmwide Conduct Committee is responsible for the ongoing approval and
monitoring of the frameworks and policies which govern our conduct risks.
Conduct risk is the risk that our people fail to act in a manner consistent
with our Business Principles and related core values, policies or codes, or
applicable laws or regulations, thereby falling short in fulfilling their
responsibilities to us, our clients, colleagues, other market participants or
the broader community. This committee is chaired by our chief legal officer,
who is appointed as chair by the chairs of the Firmwide Enterprise Risk
Committee.  

Risk Governance Committee.

The Risk Governance Committee (through delegated authority from the Firmwide
Enterprise Risk Committee) is responsible for the ongoing approval and
monitoring of risk frameworks, policies and parameters related to our core
risk management processes, as well as limits, at firmwide, business and
product levels. In addition, this committee reviews the results of stress
tests and scenario analyses. To assist the Risk Governance Committee in
carrying out its mandate, a number of other risk committees with dedicated
oversight for stress testing, model risks and Volcker Rule compliance report
into the Risk Governance Committee. This committee is chaired by our chief
risk officer, who is appointed as chair by the chairs of the Firmwide
Enterprise Risk Committee.  

Firmwide Client and Business Standards Committee.

The Firmwide Client and Business Standards Committee is responsible for
overseeing relationships with our clients, client service and experience, and
related business standards, as well as client-related reputational matters.
This committee is chaired by our president and chief operating officer, who is
appointed as chair by the chief executive officer, and reports to the
Management Committee. This committee periodically provides updates to, and
receives guidance from, the Public Responsibilities Committee of the Board.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The following committees report jointly to the Firmwide Enterprise Risk
Committee and the Firmwide Client and Business Standards Committee:

Firmwide Reputational Risk Committee.

The Firmwide Reputational Risk Committee is responsible for assessing
reputational risks arising from transactions that have been identified as
having potential heightened reputational risk pursuant to the criteria
established by the Firmwide Reputational Risk Committee and as determined by
committee leadership. This committee is chaired by our president and chief
operating officer, who is appointed as chair by the chief executive officer,
and the vice-chairs are our chief legal officer and the former chair of
Conflicts Resolution (now a senior advisor to the firm), who are appointed as
vice-chairs by the chair of the Firmwide Reputational Risk Committee. This
committee periodically provides updates to, and receives guidance from, the
Public Responsibilities Committee of the Board.  

Firmwide Suitability Committee.

The Firmwide Suitability Committee is responsible for setting standards and
policies for product, transaction and client suitability and providing a forum
for consistency across functions, regions and products on suitability
assessments. This committee also reviews suitability matters escalated from
other committees. This committee is

co-chaired

by our chief compliance officer, and a

co-head

of EMEA FICC sales, who are appointed as chairs by the chair of the Firmwide
Client and Business Standards Committee.  

Firmwide Investment Policy Committee.

The Firmwide Investment Policy Committee periodically reviews our investing
and lending activities on a portfolio basis, including review of risk
management and controls, and sets business standards and policies for these
types of investments. This committee is

co-chaired

by a

co-head

of our Asset Management Division, a

co-head

of our Global Markets Division and our chief risk officer, who are appointed
as chairs by our president and chief operating officer and our chief financial
officer.  

Firmwide Capital Committee.

The Firmwide Capital Committee provides approval and oversight of debt-related
transactions, including principal commitments of our capital. This committee
aims to ensure that business, reputational and suitability standards for
underwritings and capital commitments are maintained on a global basis. This
committee is

co-chaired

by the head of Credit Risk and the head of Americas Leveraged Finance, who are
appointed as chairs by the chairs of the Firmwide Enterprise Risk Committee.  

Firmwide Commitments Committee.

The Firmwide Commitments Committee reviews our underwriting and distribution
activities with respect to equity and equity-related product offerings, and
sets and maintains policies and procedures designed to ensure that legal,
reputational, regulatory and business standards are maintained on a global
basis. In addition to reviewing specific transactions, this committee
periodically conducts general strategic reviews of sectors and products and
establishes policies in connection with transaction practices. This committee
is

co-chaired

by the chief underwriting officer for EMEA, the chief equity underwriting
officer for the Americas, a

co-chairman

of the Global Financial Institutions Group and a

co-head

of the Industrials Group in our Investment Banking Division, who are appointed
as chairs by the chair of the Firmwide Client and Business Standards
Committee.  

Firmwide Asset Liability Committee.

The Firmwide Asset Liability Committee reviews and approves the strategic
direction for our financial resources, including capital, liquidity, funding
and balance sheet. This committee has oversight responsibility for asset
liability management, including interest rate and currency risk, funds
transfer pricing, capital allocation and incentives, and credit ratings. This
committee makes recommendations as to any adjustments to asset liability
management and financial resource allocation in light of current events,
risks, exposures, and regulatory requirements and approves related policies.
This committee is

co-chaired

by our chief financial officer and our global treasurer, who are appointed as
chairs by our chief executive officer, and reports to the Management
Committee.

Conflicts Management

Conflicts of interest and our approach to dealing with them are fundamental to
our client relationships, our reputation and our long-term success. The term
“conflict of interest” does not have a universally accepted meaning, and
conflicts can arise in many forms within a business or between businesses. The
responsibility for identifying potential conflicts, as well as complying with
our policies and procedures, is shared by all of our employees.

We have a multilayered approach to resolving conflicts and addressing
reputational risk. Our senior management oversees policies related to
conflicts resolution and, in conjunction with Conflicts Resolution, Legal and
Compliance, the Firmwide Client and Business Standards Committee, and other
internal committees, formulates policies, standards and principles, and
assists in making judgments regarding the appropriate resolution of particular
conflicts. Resolving potential conflicts necessarily depends on the facts and
circumstances of a particular situation and the application of experienced and
informed judgment.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

As a general matter, Conflicts Resolution reviews financing and advisory
assignments in Investment Banking and certain of our investing, lending and
other activities. In addition, we have various transaction oversight
committees, such as the Firmwide Capital, Commitments and Suitability
Committees and other committees that also review new underwritings, loans,
investments and structured products. These groups and committees work with
internal and external counsel and Compliance to evaluate and address any
actual or potential conflicts. The head of Conflicts Resolution reports to our
chief legal officer, who reports to our chief executive officer.

We regularly assess our policies and procedures that address conflicts of
interest in an effort to conduct our business in accordance with the highest
ethical standards and in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations.

Climate Risk Management

We categorize climate risk into physical risk and transition risk. Physical
risk is the risk that asset values may decline or operations may be disrupted
as a result of changes in the climate, while transition risk is the risk that
asset values may decline because of changes in climate policies or changes in
the underlying economy due to decarbonization.

As a global financial institution, climate-related risks manifest in different
ways across our businesses and we have continued to make significant
enhancements to our climate risk management framework, including steps to
further integrate climate into our broader risk management processes. We have
integrated oversight of climate-related risks into our risk management
governance structure, from senior management to our Board and its committees,
including the Risk and Public Responsibilities Committees. The Risk Committee
of the Board oversees firmwide financial and nonfinancial risks, which include
climate risk, and, as part of its oversight, receives updates on our risk
management approach to climate risk, including our approaches towards scenario
analysis and integration into existing risk management processes. The Public
Responsibilities Committee of the Board assists the Board in its oversight of
our firmwide sustainability strategy and sustainability issues affecting us,
including with respect to climate change. As part of its oversight, the Public
Responsibilities Committee receives periodic updates on our sustainability
strategy, and also periodically reviews our governance and related policies
and processes for sustainability and climate change-related risks. Senior
management within Risk is responsible for the development of our climate risk
program.

We have begun incorporating climate risk into our credit evaluation and
underwriting processes for select industries. Climate risk factors are now
evaluated as part of transaction due diligence for select loan commitments.

See “Business — Sustainability” in Part I, Item 1 and “Risk Factors” in Part
I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

for information about our sustainability initiatives, including in relation to
climate transition.

Compliance Risk Management

Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, material
financial loss or damage to our reputation arising from our failure to comply
with the requirements of applicable laws, rules and regulations, and our
internal policies and procedures. Compliance risk is inherent in all
activities through which we conduct our businesses. Our Compliance Risk
Management Program, administered by Compliance, assesses our compliance,
regulatory and reputational risk; monitors for compliance with new or amended
laws, rules and regulations; designs and implements controls, policies,
procedures and training; conducts independent testing; investigates, surveils
and monitors for compliance risks and breaches; and leads our responses to
regulatory examinations, audits and inquiries. We monitor and review business
practices to assess whether they meet or exceed minimum regulatory and legal
standards in all markets and jurisdictions in which we conduct business.

Capital Risk Management

Capital risk is the risk that our capital is insufficient to support our
business activities under normal and stressed market conditions or we face
capital reductions or RWA increases, including from new or revised rules or
changes in interpretations of existing rules, and are therefore unable to meet
our internal capital targets or external regulatory capital requirements.
Capital adequacy is of critical importance to us. Accordingly, we have in
place a comprehensive capital management policy that provides a framework,
defines objectives and establishes guidelines to maintain an appropriate level
and composition of capital in both

business-as-usual

and stressed conditions. Our capital management framework is designed to
provide us with the information needed to comprehensively manage risk, and
develop and apply projected stress scenarios that capture idiosyncratic
vulnerabilities with a goal of holding sufficient capital to remain adequately
capitalized even after experiencing a severe stress event. See “Capital
Management and Regulatory Capital” for further information about our capital
management process.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

We have established a comprehensive governance structure to manage and oversee
our

day-to-day

capital management activities and compliance with capital rules and related
policies. Our capital management activities are overseen by the Board and its
committees. The Board is responsible for approving our annual capital plan and
the Risk Committee of the Board approves our capital management policy. In
addition, committees and members of senior management are responsible for the
ongoing monitoring of our capital adequacy and evaluate current and future
regulatory capital requirements, review the results of our capital planning
and stress tests processes, and the results of our capital models, review our
contingency capital plan, key capital adequacy metrics, including regulatory
capital ratios, as well as capital plan metrics, such as the payout ratio,
outcomes and findings of calculation testing, and monitor capital risk limits
and breaches.

Our process for managing capital risk also includes independent review
functions in Risk that, among other things, assess regulatory capital policies
and related interpretations, escalate certain interpretations to senior
management and/or the appropriate risk committee, and perform calculation
testing to corroborate alignment with applicable capital rules.

Liquidity Risk Management

Overview

Liquidity risk is the risk that we will be unable to fund ourselves or meet
our liquidity needs in the event of firm-specific, broader industry or market
liquidity stress events. We have in place a comprehensive and conservative set
of liquidity and funding policies. Our principal objective is to be able to
fund ourselves and to enable our core businesses to continue to serve clients
and generate revenues, even under adverse circumstances.

Treasury, which reports to our chief financial officer, has primary
responsibility for developing, managing and executing our liquidity and
funding strategy within our risk appetite.

Liquidity Risk, which is independent of our revenue-producing units and
Treasury, and reports to our chief risk officer, has primary responsibility
for assessing, monitoring and managing our liquidity risk through firmwide
oversight across our global businesses and the establishment of stress testing
and limits frameworks.

Liquidity Risk Management Principles

We manage liquidity risk according to three principles: (i) hold sufficient
excess liquidity in the form of GCLA to cover outflows during a stressed
period, (ii) maintain appropriate Asset-Liability Management and (iii)
maintain a viable Contingency Funding Plan.

GCLA.

GCLA is liquidity that we maintain to meet a broad range of potential cash
outflows and collateral needs in a stressed environment. A primary liquidity
principle is to

pre-fund

our estimated potential cash and collateral needs during a liquidity crisis
and hold this liquidity in the form of unencumbered, highly liquid securities
and cash. We believe that the securities held in our GCLA would be readily
convertible to cash in a matter of days, through liquidation, by entering into
repurchase agreements or from maturities of resale agreements, and that this
cash would allow us to meet immediate obligations without needing to sell
other assets or depend on additional funding from credit-sensitive markets.

Our GCLA reflects the following principles:

The first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most critical to a
company’s survival;  

Focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral outflows, not
just disruptions to financing flows. Our businesses are diverse, and our
liquidity needs are determined by many factors, including market movements,
collateral requirements and client commitments, all of which can change
dramatically in a difficult funding environment;  

During a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including unsecured debt,
certain deposits and some types of secured financing agreements, may be
unavailable, and the terms (e.g., interest rates, collateral provisions and
tenor) or availability of other types of secured financing may change and
certain deposits may be withdrawn; and  

As a result of our policy to

pre-fund

liquidity that we estimate may be needed in a crisis, we hold more
unencumbered securities and have larger funding balances than our businesses
would otherwise require. We believe that our liquidity is stronger with
greater balances of highly liquid unencumbered securities, even though it
increases our total assets and our funding costs.  

We maintain our GCLA across Group Inc., Goldman Sachs Funding LLC (Funding
IHC) and Group Inc.’s major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries, asset types
and clearing agents to provide us with sufficient operating liquidity to
ensure timely settlement in all major markets, even in a difficult funding
environment. In addition to the GCLA, we maintain cash balances and securities
in several of our other entities, primarily for use in specific currencies,
entities or jurisdictions where we do not have immediate access to parent
company liquidity.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Asset-Liability Management.

Our liquidity risk management policies are designed to ensure we have a
sufficient amount of financing, even when funding markets experience
persistent stress. We manage the maturities and diversity of our funding
across markets, products and counterparties, and seek to maintain a
diversified funding profile with an appropriate tenor, taking into
consideration the characteristics and liquidity profile of our assets.

Our approach to asset-liability management includes:

Conservatively managing the overall characteristics of our funding book, with
a focus on maintaining long-term, diversified sources of funding in excess of
our current requirements. See “Balance Sheet and Funding Sources — Funding
Sources” for further information;  

Actively managing and monitoring our asset base, with particular focus on the
liquidity, holding period and ability to fund assets on a secured basis. We
assess our funding requirements and our ability to liquidate assets in a
stressed environment while appropriately managing risk. This enables us to
determine the most appropriate funding products and tenors. See “Balance Sheet
and Funding Sources — Balance Sheet Management” for further information about
our balance sheet management process and “— Funding Sources — Secured Funding”
for further information about asset classes that may be harder to fund on a
secured basis; and  

Raising secured and unsecured financing that has a long tenor relative to the
liquidity profile of our assets. This reduces the risk that our liabilities
will come due in advance of our ability to generate liquidity from the sale of
our assets. Because we maintain a highly liquid balance sheet, the holding
period of certain of our assets may be materially shorter than their
contractual maturity dates.  

Our goal is to ensure that we maintain sufficient liquidity to fund our assets
and meet our contractual and contingent obligations in normal times, as well
as during periods of market stress. Through our dynamic balance sheet
management process, we use actual and projected asset balances to determine
secured and unsecured funding requirements. Funding plans are reviewed and
approved by the Firmwide Asset Liability Committee. In addition, our
independent risk oversight and control functions analyze, and the Firmwide
Asset Liability Committee reviews, our consolidated total capital position
(unsecured long-term borrowings plus total shareholders’ equity) so that we
maintain a level of long-term funding that is sufficient to meet our long-term
financing requirements. In a liquidity crisis, we would first use our GCLA in
order to avoid reliance on asset sales (other than our GCLA). However, we
recognize that orderly asset sales may be prudent or necessary in a severe or
persistent liquidity crisis.

Subsidiary Funding Policies

The majority of our unsecured funding is raised by Group Inc., which provides
the necessary funds to Funding IHC and other subsidiaries, some of which are
regulated, to meet their asset financing, liquidity and capital requirements.
In addition, Group Inc. provides its regulated subsidiaries with the necessary
capital to meet their regulatory requirements. The benefits of this approach
to subsidiary funding are enhanced control and greater flexibility to meet the
funding requirements of our subsidiaries. Funding is also raised at the
subsidiary level through a variety of products, including deposits, secured
funding and unsecured borrowings.

Our intercompany funding policies assume that a subsidiary’s funds or
securities are not freely available to its parent, Funding IHC or other
subsidiaries unless (i) legally provided for and (ii) there are no additional
regulatory, tax or other restrictions. In particular, many of our subsidiaries
are subject to laws that authorize regulatory bodies to block or reduce the
flow of funds from those subsidiaries to Group Inc. or Funding IHC. Regulatory
action of that kind could impede access to funds that Group Inc. needs to make
payments on its obligations. Accordingly, we assume that the capital provided
to our regulated subsidiaries is not available to Group Inc. or other
subsidiaries and any other financing provided to our regulated subsidiaries is
not available to Group Inc. or Funding IHC until the maturity of such
financing.

Group Inc. has provided substantial amounts of equity and subordinated
indebtedness, directly or indirectly, to its regulated subsidiaries. For
example, as of December 2021, Group Inc. had $38.08 billion of equity and
subordinated indebtedness invested in GS&Co., its principal U.S. registered
broker-dealer; $44.44 billion invested in GSI, a regulated U.K. broker-dealer;
$2.50 billion invested in GSJCL, a regulated Japanese broker-dealer; $46.17
billion invested in GS Bank USA, a regulated New York State-chartered bank;
and $4.28 billion invested in GSIB, a regulated U.K. bank. Group Inc. also
provides financing, directly or indirectly, in the form of: $95.74 billion of
unsubordinated loans (including secured loans of $41.91 billion) and $17.68
billion of collateral and cash deposits to these entities as of December 2021.
In addition, as of December 2021, Group Inc. had significant amounts of
capital invested in and loans to its other regulated subsidiaries.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Contingency Funding Plan.

We maintain a contingency funding plan to provide a framework for analyzing
and responding to a liquidity crisis situation or periods of market stress.
Our contingency funding plan outlines a list of potential risk factors, key
reports and metrics that are reviewed on an ongoing basis to assist in
assessing the severity of, and managing through, a liquidity crisis and/or
market dislocation. The contingency funding plan also describes in detail our
potential responses if our assessments indicate that we have entered a
liquidity crisis, which include

pre-funding

for what we estimate will be our potential cash and collateral needs, as well
as utilizing secondary sources of liquidity. Mitigants and action items to
address specific risks which may arise are also described and assigned to
individuals responsible for execution.

The contingency funding plan identifies key groups of individuals and their
responsibilities, which include fostering effective coordination, control and
distribution of information, implementing liquidity maintenance activities and
managing internal and external communication, all of which are critical in the
management of a crisis or period of market stress.

Stress Tests

In order to determine the appropriate size of our GCLA, we model liquidity
outflows over a range of scenarios and time horizons. One of our primary
internal liquidity risk models, referred to as the Modeled Liquidity Outflow,
quantifies our liquidity risks over a

30-day

stress scenario. We also consider other factors, including, but not limited
to, an assessment of our potential intraday liquidity needs through an
additional internal liquidity risk model, referred to as the Intraday
Liquidity Model, the results of our long-term stress testing models, our
resolution liquidity models and other applicable regulatory requirements and a
qualitative assessment of our condition, as well as the financial markets. The
results of the Modeled Liquidity Outflow, the Intraday Liquidity Model, the
long-term stress testing models and the resolution liquidity models are
reported to senior management on a regular basis. We also perform firmwide
stress tests. See “Overview and Structure of Risk Management” for information
about firmwide stress tests.

Modeled Liquidity Outflow.

Our Modeled Liquidity Outflow is based on conducting multiple scenarios that
include combinations of market-wide and firm-specific stress. These scenarios
are characterized by the following qualitative elements:

Severely challenged market environments, which includes low consumer and
corporate confidence, financial and political instability, and adverse changes
in market values, including potential declines in equity markets and widening
of credit spreads; and  

A firm-specific crisis potentially triggered by material losses, reputational
damage, litigation and/or a ratings downgrade.  

The following are key modeling elements of our Modeled Liquidity Outflow:

Liquidity needs over a

30-day

scenario;  

A

two-notch

downgrade of our long-term senior unsecured credit ratings;  

Changing conditions in funding markets, which limit our access to unsecured
and secured funding;  

No support from additional government funding facilities. Although we have
access to various central bank funding programs, we do not assume reliance on
additional sources of funding in a liquidity crisis; and  

A combination of contractual outflows and contingent outflows arising from
both our

on-

and

off-balance

sheet arrangements. Contractual outflows include, among other things, upcoming
maturities of unsecured debt, term deposits and secured funding. Contingent
outflows include, among other things, the withdrawal of customer credit
balances in our prime brokerage business, increase in variation margin
requirements due to adverse changes in the value of our exchange-traded and

OTC-cleared

derivatives, draws on unfunded commitments and withdrawals of deposits that
have no contractual maturity. See notes to the consolidated financial
statements for further information about contractual outflows, including Note
11 for collateralized financings, Note 13 for deposits, Note 14 for unsecured
long-term borrowings and Note 15 for operating lease payments, and

“Off-Balance

Sheet Arrangements” for further information about our various types of

off-balance

sheet arrangements.  

Intraday Liquidity Model.

Our Intraday Liquidity Model measures our intraday liquidity needs using a
scenario analysis characterized by the same qualitative elements as our
Modeled Liquidity Outflow. The model assesses the risk of increased intraday
liquidity requirements during a scenario where access to sources of intraday
liquidity may become constrained.

Long-Term Stress Testing.

We utilize longer-term stress tests to take a forward view on our liquidity
position through prolonged stress periods in which we experience a severe
liquidity stress and recover in an environment that continues to be
challenging. We are focused on ensuring conservative asset-liability
management to prepare for a prolonged period of potential stress, seeking to
maintain a diversified funding profile with an appropriate tenor, taking into
consideration the characteristics and liquidity profile of our assets.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Resolution Liquidity Models.

In connection with our resolution planning efforts, we have established our
Resolution Liquidity Adequacy and Positioning framework, which estimates
liquidity needs of our major subsidiaries in a stressed environment. The
liquidity needs are measured using our Modeled Liquidity Outflow assumptions
and include certain additional inter-affiliate exposures. We have also
established our Resolution Liquidity Execution Need framework, which measures
the liquidity needs of our major subsidiaries to stabilize and wind-down
following a Group Inc. bankruptcy filing in accordance with our preferred
resolution strategy.

In addition, we have established a triggers and alerts framework, which is
designed to provide the Board with information needed to make an informed
decision on whether and when to commence bankruptcy proceedings for Group Inc.

Limits

We use liquidity risk limits at various levels and across liquidity risk types
to manage the size of our liquidity exposures. Limits are measured relative to
acceptable levels of risk given our liquidity risk tolerance. See “Overview
and Structure of Risk Management” for information about the limit approval
process.

Limits are monitored by Treasury and Liquidity Risk. Liquidity Risk is
responsible for identifying and escalating to senior management and/or the
appropriate risk committee, on a timely basis, instances where limits have
been exceeded.

GCLA and Unencumbered Metrics

GCLA.

Based on the results of our internal liquidity risk models, described above,
as well as our consideration of other factors, including, but not limited to,
a qualitative assessment of our condition, as well as the financial markets,
we believe our liquidity position as of both December 2021 and December 2020
was appropriate. We strictly limit our GCLA to a narrowly defined list of
securities and cash because they are highly liquid, even in a difficult
funding environment. We do not include other potential sources of excess
liquidity in our GCLA, such as less liquid unencumbered securities or
committed credit facilities.

The table below presents information about our GCLA.

In the table above:

The U.S. dollar-denominated GCLA consists of (i) unencumbered U.S. government
and agency obligations (including highly liquid U.S. agency mortgage-backed
obligations), all of which are eligible as collateral in Federal Reserve open
market operations and (ii) certain overnight U.S. dollar cash deposits.  

The

non-U.S.

dollar-denominated GCLA consists of

non-U.S.

government obligations (only unencumbered German, French, Japanese and U.K.
government obligations) and certain overnight cash deposits in highly liquid
currencies.  

We maintain our GCLA to enable us to meet current and potential liquidity
requirements of our parent company, Group Inc., and its subsidiaries. Our
Modeled Liquidity Outflow and Intraday Liquidity Model incorporate a
requirement for Group Inc., as well as a standalone requirement for each of
our major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries. Funding IHC is required to
provide the necessary liquidity to Group Inc. during the ordinary course of
business, and is also obligated to provide capital and liquidity support to
major subsidiaries in the event of our material financial distress or failure.
Liquidity held directly in each of our major broker-dealer and bank
subsidiaries is intended for use only by that subsidiary to meet its liquidity
requirements and is assumed not to be available to Group Inc. or Funding IHC
unless (i) legally provided for and (ii) there are no additional regulatory,
tax or other restrictions. In addition, the Modeled Liquidity Outflow and
Intraday Liquidity Model also incorporate a broader assessment of standalone
liquidity requirements for other subsidiaries and we hold a portion of our
GCLA directly at Group Inc. or Funding IHC to support such requirements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Other Unencumbered Assets.

In addition to our GCLA, we have a significant amount of other unencumbered
cash and financial instruments, including other government obligations, high-
grade money market securities, corporate obligations, marginable equities,
loans and cash deposits not included in our GCLA. The fair value of our
unencumbered assets averaged $271.65 billion for the three months ended
December 2021, $214.06 billion for the three months ended December 2020,
$249.32 billion for the year ended December 2021 and $207.60 billion for the
year ended December 2020. We do not consider these assets liquid enough to be
eligible for our GCLA.

Liquidity Regulatory Framework

As a BHC, we are subject to a minimum Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) under the
LCR rule approved by the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies. The LCR rule
requires organizations to maintain an adequate ratio of eligible high-quality
liquid assets (HQLA) to expected net cash outflows under an acute, short-term
liquidity stress scenario. Eligible HQLA excludes HQLA held by subsidiaries
that is in excess of their minimum requirement and is subject to transfer
restrictions. We are required to maintain a minimum LCR of 100%. We expect
that fluctuations in client activity, business mix and the market environment
will impact our LCR.

The table below presents information about our average daily LCR.

In October 2020, the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule
that established a net stable funding ratio (NSFR) requirement for large U.S.
banking organizations. This rule became effective on July 1, 2021 and requires
banking organizations to ensure they have access to stable funding over a

one-year

time horizon. The rule also requires disclosure of the ratio on a semi-annual
basis and a description of the banking organization’s stable funding sources
beginning in 2023. Our NSFR as of December 2021 exceeded the minimum
requirement.

The following provides information about our subsidiary liquidity regulatory
requirements:

GS Bank USA.

GS Bank USA is subject to a minimum LCR of 100% under the LCR rule approved by
the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies. As of December 2021, GS Bank USA’s
LCR exceeded the minimum requirement. The NSFR requirement described above
also applies to GS Bank USA. As of December 2021, GS Bank USA’s NSFR exceeded
the minimum requirement.  

GSI and GSIB.

GSI and GSIB are subject to a minimum LCR of 100% under the LCR rule approved
by the U.K. regulatory authorities. GSI’s and GSIB’s average monthly LCR for
the trailing twelve-month period ended December 2021 exceeded the minimum
requirement. GSI and GSIB are subject to the applicable NSFR requirement in
the U.K., which became effective in January 2022. As of December 2021, both
GSI’s and GSIB’s NSFR exceeded the minimum requirement.  

GSBE.

GSBE is subject to a minimum LCR of 100% under the LCR rule approved by the
European Parliament and Council. GSBE’s average monthly LCR for the trailing
twelve-month period ended December 2021 exceeded the minimum requirement. GSBE
is subject to the applicable NSFR requirement in the E.U., which became
effective in June 2021. As of December 2021, GSBE’s NSFR exceeded the minimum
requirement.  

Other Subsidiaries.

We monitor local regulatory liquidity requirements of our subsidiaries to
ensure compliance. For many of our subsidiaries, these requirements either
have changed or are likely to change in the future due to the implementation
of the Basel Committee’s framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards
and monitoring, as well as other regulatory developments.  

The implementation of these rules and any amendments adopted by the regulatory
authorities could impact our liquidity and funding requirements and practices
in the future.

Credit Ratings

We rely on the short- and long-term debt capital markets to fund a significant
portion of our

day-to-day

operations and the cost and availability of debt financing is influenced by
our credit ratings. Credit ratings are also important when we are competing in
certain markets, such as OTC derivatives, and when we seek to engage in
longer-term transactions. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

for information about the risks associated with a reduction in our credit
ratings.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents the unsecured credit ratings and outlook of Group
Inc.

As of December 2021

DBRS

Fitch

Moody’s

R&I

S&P

Short-term debt

R-1 (middle)

F1

P-1

a-1

A-2

Long-term debt

A (high)

A

A2

A

BBB+

Subordinated debt

A

BBB+

Baa2

A-

BBB

Trust preferred

A

BBB-

Baa3

N/A

BB+

Preferred stock

BBB (high)

BBB-

Ba1

N/A

BB+

Ratings outlook

Stable

Stable

Stable

Stable

Stable

In the table above:

The ratings and outlook are by DBRS, Inc. (DBRS), Fitch, Inc. (Fitch), Moody’s
Investors Service (Moody’s), Rating and Investment Information, Inc. (R&I),
and Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services (S&P).  

The ratings for trust preferred relate to the guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests issued by Goldman Sachs Capital I.  

The DBRS, Fitch, Moody’s and S&P ratings for preferred stock include the APEX
issued by Goldman Sachs Capital II and Goldman Sachs Capital III.  

The table below presents the unsecured credit ratings and outlook of GS Bank
USA, GSIB, GSBE, GS&Co. and GSI.

As of December 2021

Fitch

Moody’s

S&P

GS Bank USA

Short-term debt

F1

P-1

A-1

Long-term debt

A+

A1

A+

Short-term bank deposits

F1+

P-1

N/A

Long-term bank deposits

AA-

A1

N/A

Ratings outlook

Stable

Stable

Stable

GSIB

Short-term debt

F1

P-1

A-1

Long-term debt

A+

A1

A+

Short-term bank deposits

F1

P-1

N/A

Long-term bank deposits

A+

A1

N/A

Ratings outlook

Stable

Stable

Stable

GSBE

Short-term debt

F1

P-1

A-1

Long-term debt

A

A1

A+

Short-term bank deposits

N/A

P-1

N/A

Long-term bank deposits

N/A

A1

N/A

Ratings outlook

Stable

Stable

Stable

GS&Co.

Short-term debt

F1

N/A

A-1

Long-term debt

A+

N/A

A+

Ratings outlook

Stable

N/A

Stable

GSI

Short-term debt

F1

P-1

A-1

Long-term debt

A+

A1

A+

Ratings outlook

Stable

Stable

Stable

We believe our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating
agencies’ assessment of:

Our liquidity, market, credit and operational risk management practices;  

Our level and variability of earnings;  

Our capital base;  

Our franchise, reputation and management;  

Our corporate governance; and  

The external operating and economic environment, including, in some cases, the
assumed level of government support or other systemic considerations, such as
potential resolution.  

Certain of our derivatives have been transacted under bilateral agreements
with counterparties who may require us to post collateral or terminate the
transactions based on changes in our credit ratings. We manage our GCLA to
ensure we would, among other potential requirements, be able to make the
additional collateral or termination payments that may be required in the
event of a

two-notch

reduction in our long-term credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not
been called by counterparties, but is available to them.

See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about derivatives with credit-related contingent features and the additional
collateral or termination payments related to our net derivative liabilities
under bilateral agreements that could have been called by counterparties in
the event of a

one-

or

two-notch

downgrade in our credit ratings.

Cash Flows

As a global financial institution, our cash flows are complex and bear little
relation to our net earnings and net assets. Consequently, we believe that
traditional cash flow analysis is less meaningful in evaluating our liquidity
position than the liquidity and asset-liability management policies described
above. Cash flow analysis may, however, be helpful in highlighting certain
macro trends and strategic initiatives in our businesses.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Year Ended December 2021.

Our cash and cash equivalents increased by $105.19 billion to $261.04 billion
at the end of 2021, primarily due to net cash provided by financing
activities, partially offset by net cash used for investing activities. The
net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflected an increase in
net deposits, reflecting increases across channels, and net issuances of
unsecured long-term borrowings. The net cash used for investing activities
primarily reflected purchases of investments and an increase in net lending
activities, partially offset by sales and paydowns of investments.

Year Ended December 2020.

Our cash and cash equivalents increased by $22.30 billion to $155.84 billion
at the end of 2020, primarily due to net cash provided by financing
activities, partially offset by net cash used for investing activities and
operating activities. The net cash provided by financing activities primarily
reflected an increase in net deposits, reflecting increases in consumer,
transaction banking and private bank deposits. The net cash used for investing
activities primarily reflected an increase in net purchases of investments,
reflecting an increase in U.S. government obligations accounted for as

available-for-sale

and an increase in net lending activities. The net cash used for operating
activities primarily reflected an increase in trading assets, net customer and
other receivables and payables, and collateralized transactions (an increase
in collateralized agreements, partially offset by an increase in
collateralized financings), partially offset by an increase in trading
liabilities as a result of our and our clients’ activities.

For an analysis of cash flows for the year ended December 2019, see Part II,
Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on

Form 10-K

for the year ended December 31, 2020.

Market Risk Management

Overview

Market risk is the risk of loss in the value of our inventory, investments,
loans and other financial assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value
due to changes in market conditions. We hold such positions primarily for
market making for our clients and for our investing and financing activities,
and therefore, these positions change based on client demands and our
investment opportunities. Since these positions are accounted for at fair
value, they fluctuate on a daily basis, with the related gains and losses
included in the consolidated statements of earnings. We employ a variety of
risk measures, each described in the respective sections below, to monitor
market risk. Categories of market risk include the following:

Interest rate risk: results from exposures to changes in the level, slope and
curvature of yield curves, the volatilities of interest rates, prepayment
speeds and credit spreads;  

Equity price risk: results from exposures to changes in prices and
volatilities of individual equities, baskets of equities and equity indices;  

Currency rate risk: results from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward
prices and volatilities of currency rates; and  

Commodity price risk: results from exposures to changes in spot prices,
forward prices and volatilities of commodities, such as crude oil, petroleum
products, natural gas, electricity, and precious and base metals.  

Market Risk, which is independent of our revenue-producing units and reports
to our chief risk officer, has primary responsibility for assessing,
monitoring and managing our market risk through firmwide oversight across our
global businesses.

Managers in revenue-producing units and Market Risk discuss market
information, positions and estimated loss scenarios on an ongoing basis.
Managers in revenue-producing units are accountable for managing risk within
prescribed limits. These managers have

in-depth

knowledge of their positions, markets and the instruments available to hedge
their exposures.

Market Risk Management Process

Our process for managing market risk includes the critical components of our
risk management framework described in the “Overview and Structure of Risk
Management,” as well as the following:

Monitoring compliance with established market risk limits and reporting our
exposures;  

Diversifying exposures;  

Controlling position sizes; and  

Evaluating mitigants, such as economic hedges in related securities or
derivatives.  

Our market risk management systems enable us to perform an independent
calculation of

Value-at-Risk

(VaR) and stress measures, capture risk measures at individual position
levels, attribute risk measures to individual risk factors of each position,
report many different views of the risk measures (e.g., by desk, business,
product type or entity) and produce ad hoc analyses in a timely manner.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Risk Measures

We produce risk measures and monitor them against established market risk
limits. These measures reflect an extensive range of scenarios and the results
are aggregated at product, business and firmwide levels.

We use a variety of risk measures to estimate the size of potential losses for
both moderate and more extreme market moves over both short- and long-term
time horizons. Our primary risk measures are VaR, which is used for shorter-
term periods, and stress tests. Our risk reports detail key risks, drivers and
changes for each desk and business, and are distributed daily to senior
management of both our revenue-producing units and our independent risk
oversight and control functions.

Value-at-Risk.

VaR is the potential loss in value due to adverse market movements over a
defined time horizon with a specified confidence level. For assets and
liabilities included in VaR, see “Financial Statement Linkages to Market Risk
Measures.” We typically employ a

one-day

time horizon with a 95% confidence level. We use a single VaR model, which
captures risks, including interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and
commodity prices. As such, VaR facilitates comparison across portfolios of
different risk characteristics. VaR also captures the diversification of
aggregated risk at the firmwide level.

We are aware of the inherent limitations to VaR and therefore use a variety of
risk measures in our market risk management process. Inherent limitations to
VaR include:

VaR does not estimate potential losses over longer time horizons where moves
may be extreme;  

VaR does not take account of the relative liquidity of different risk
positions; and  

Previous moves in market risk factors may not produce accurate predictions of
all future market moves.  

To comprehensively capture our exposures and relevant risks in our VaR
calculation, we use historical simulations with full valuation of market
factors at the position level by simultaneously shocking the relevant market
factors for that position. These market factors include spot prices, credit
spreads, funding spreads, yield curves, volatility and correlation, and are
updated periodically based on changes in the composition of positions, as well
as variations in market conditions. We sample from five years of historical
data to generate the scenarios for our VaR calculation. The historical data is
weighted so that the relative importance of the data reduces over time. This
gives greater importance to more recent observations and reflects current
asset volatilities, which improves the accuracy of our estimates of potential
loss. As a result, even if our positions included in VaR were unchanged, our
VaR would increase with increasing market volatility and vice versa.

Given its reliance on historical data, VaR is most effective in estimating
risk exposures in markets in which there are no sudden fundamental changes or
shifts in market conditions.

Our VaR measure does not include:

Positions that are best measured and monitored using sensitivity measures; and  

The impact of changes in counterparty and our own credit spreads on
derivatives, as well as changes in our own credit spreads on financial
liabilities for which the fair value option was elected.  

We perform daily backtesting of our VaR model (i.e., comparing daily net
revenues for positions included in VaR to the VaR measure calculated as of the
prior business day) at the firmwide level and for each of our businesses and
major regulated subsidiaries.

Stress Testing.

Stress testing is a method of determining the effect of various hypothetical
stress scenarios. We use stress testing to examine risks of specific
portfolios, as well as the potential impact of our significant risk exposures.
We use a variety of stress testing techniques to calculate the potential loss
from a wide range of market moves on our portfolios, including firmwide stress
tests, sensitivity analysis and scenario analysis. The results of our various
stress tests are analyzed together for risk management purposes. See “Overview
and Structure of Risk Management” for information about firmwide stress tests.

Sensitivity analysis is used to quantify the impact of a market move in a
single risk factor across all positions (e.g., equity prices or credit
spreads) using a variety of defined market shocks, ranging from those that
could be expected over a

one-day

time horizon up to those that could take many months to occur. We also use
sensitivity analysis to quantify the impact of the default of any single
entity, which captures the risk of large or concentrated exposures.

Scenario analysis is used to quantify the impact of a specified event,
including how the event impacts multiple risk factors simultaneously. For
example, for sovereign stress testing we calculate potential direct exposure
associated with our sovereign positions, as well as the corresponding debt,
equity and currency exposures associated with our

non-sovereign

positions that may be impacted by the sovereign distress. When conducting
scenario analysis, we often consider a number of possible outcomes for each
scenario, ranging from moderate to severely adverse market impacts. In
addition, these stress tests are constructed using both historical events and
forward-looking hypothetical scenarios.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Unlike VaR measures, which have an implied probability because they are
calculated at a specified confidence level, there may not be an implied
probability that our stress testing scenarios will occur. Instead, stress
testing is used to model both moderate and more extreme moves in underlying
market factors. When estimating potential loss, we generally assume that our
positions cannot be reduced or hedged (although experience demonstrates that
we are generally able to do so).

Limits

We use market risk limits at various levels to manage the size of our market
exposures. These limits are set based on VaR and on a range of stress tests
relevant to our exposures. See “Overview and Structure of Risk Management” for
information about the limit approval process.

Market Risk is responsible for monitoring these limits, and identifying and
escalating to senior management and/or the appropriate risk committee, on a
timely basis, instances where limits have been exceeded (e.g., due to
positional changes or changes in market conditions, such as increased
volatilities or changes in correlations). Such instances are remediated by a
reduction in the positions we hold and/or a temporary or permanent increase to
the limit, if warranted.

Metrics

We analyze VaR at the firmwide level and a variety of more detailed levels,
including by risk category, business and region. Diversification effect in the
tables below represents the difference between total VaR and the sum of the
VaRs for the four risk categories. This effect arises because the four market
risk categories are not perfectly correlated.

The table below presents our average daily VaR.

Our average daily VaR decreased to $86 million in 2021 from $94 million in
2020, due to lower levels of volatility, partially offset by increased
exposures. The total decrease of $8 million was driven by decreases in the
equity prices, interest rates and currency rates categories, partially offset
by a decrease in the diversification effect and an increase in the commodity
prices category.

The table below presents our

period-end

VaR.

Our

period-end

VaR was $91 million as of December 2021, unchanged compared with December
2020, reflecting increased exposures, offset by lower levels of volatility.
This was driven by increases in the commodity prices, interest rates and
currency rates categories, offset by a decrease in the equity prices category
and an increase in the diversification effect.

During 2021, the firmwide VaR risk limit was not exceeded, raised or reduced,
and there were no permanent or temporary changes to the firmwide VaR risk
limit. During 2020, the firmwide VaR risk limit was exceeded on 16 occasions
(all of which occurred during the first half of 2020), primarily due to higher
levels of volatility. There were no permanent changes to the firmwide VaR risk
limit during this period. However, there were temporary increases to the
firmwide VaR risk limit as a result of the market environment in 2020.

The table below presents our high and low VaR.

The chart below presents our daily VaR for 2021.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents, by number of business days, the frequency
distribution of our daily net revenues for positions included in VaR.

Daily net revenues for positions included in VaR are compared with VaR
calculated as of the end of the prior business day. Net losses incurred on a
single day for such positions exceeded our 95%

one-day

VaR (i.e., a VaR exception) on one occasion during 2021 and on two occasions
during 2020.

During periods in which we have significantly more positive net revenue days
than net revenue loss days, we expect to have fewer VaR exceptions because,
under normal conditions, our business model generally produces positive net
revenues. In periods in which our franchise revenues are adversely affected,
we generally have more loss days, resulting in more VaR exceptions. The daily
net revenues for positions included in VaR used to determine VaR exceptions
reflect the impact of any intraday activity, including bid/offer net revenues,
which are more likely than not to be positive by their nature.

Sensitivity Measures

Certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in VaR because
VaR is not the most appropriate risk measure. Other sensitivity measures we
use to analyze market risk are described below.

10% Sensitivity Measures.

The table below presents our market risk by asset category for positions
accounted for at fair value, that are not included in VaR.

In the table above:

The market risk of these positions is determined by estimating the potential
reduction in net revenues of a 10% decline in the value of these positions.  

Equity positions relate to private and restricted public equity securities,
including interests in funds that invest in corporate equities and real estate
and interests in hedge funds.  

Debt positions include interests in funds that invest in corporate mezzanine
and senior debt instruments, loans backed by commercial and residential real
estate, corporate bank loans and other corporate debt, including acquired
portfolios of distressed loans.  

Funded equity and debt positions are included in our consolidated balance
sheets in investments and loans. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial
statements for further information about investments and Note 9 to the
consolidated financial statements for further information about loans.  

These measures do not reflect the diversification effect across asset
categories or across other market risk measures.  

Credit and Funding Spread Sensitivity on Derivatives and Financial
Liabilities.

VaR excludes the impact of changes in counterparty credit spreads, our own
credit spreads and unsecured funding spreads on derivatives, as well as
changes in our own credit spreads (debt valuation adjustment) on financial
liabilities for which the fair value option was elected. The estimated
sensitivity to a one basis point increase in credit spreads (counterparty and
our own) and unsecured funding spreads on derivatives (including hedges) was a
loss of $1 million as of December 2021 and $3 million as of December 2020. In
addition, the estimated sensitivity to a one basis point increase in our own
credit spreads on financial liabilities for which the fair value option was
elected was a gain of $33 million as of December 2021 and $22 million as of
December 2020. However, the actual net impact of a change in our own credit
spreads is also affected by the liquidity, duration and convexity (as the
sensitivity is not linear to changes in yields) of those financial liabilities
for which the fair value option was elected, as well as the relative
performance of any hedges undertaken.

Interest Rate Sensitivity.

Loans accounted for at amortized cost were $139.93 billion as of December 2021
and $99.69 billion as of December 2020, substantially all of which had
floating interest rates. The estimated sensitivity to a 100 basis point
increase in interest rates on such loans was $1.07 billion as of December 2021
and $737 million as of December 2020 of additional interest income over a
twelve-month period, which does not take into account the potential impact of
an increase in costs to fund such loans. See Note 9 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about loans accounted for at
amortized cost.

Other Market Risk Considerations

We make investments in securities that are accounted for as

available-for-sale,

held-to-maturity

or under the equity method which are included in investments in the
consolidated balance sheets. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial
statements for further information.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Direct investments in real estate are accounted for at cost less accumulated
depreciation. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further
information about other assets.

Financial Statement Linkages to Market Risk Measures

We employ a variety of risk measures, each described in the respective
sections above, to monitor market risk across the consolidated balance sheets
and consolidated statements of earnings. The related gains and losses on these
positions are included in market making, other principal transactions,
interest income and interest expense in the consolidated statements of
earnings, and debt valuation adjustment in the consolidated statements of
comprehensive income.

The table below presents certain assets and liabilities in our consolidated
balance sheets and the market risk measures used to assess those assets and
liabilities.

Assets or Liabilities

Market Risk Measures  

Collateralized agreements, at fair value

VaR  

Customer and other receivables, at fair value

10% Sensitivity Measures  

Trading assets

VaR

Credit Spread Sensitivity  

Investments, at fair value

VaR

10% Sensitivity Measures  

Loans

VaR

10% Sensitivity Measures

Interest Rate Sensitivity  

Deposits, at fair value

VaR

Credit Spread Sensitivity  

Collateralized financings, at fair value

VaR  

Trading liabilities

VaR

Credit Spread Sensitivity  

Unsecured borrowings, at fair value

VaR

Credit Spread Sensitivity  

Credit Risk Management

Overview

Credit risk represents the potential for loss due to the default or
deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty (e.g., an OTC derivatives
counterparty or a borrower) or an issuer of securities or other instruments we
hold. Our exposure to credit risk comes mostly from client transactions in OTC
derivatives and loans and lending commitments. Credit risk also comes from
cash placed with banks, securities financing transactions (i.e., resale and
repurchase agreements and securities borrowing and lending activities) and
customer and other receivables.

Credit Risk, which is independent of our revenue-producing units and reports
to our chief risk officer, has primary responsibility for assessing,
monitoring and managing our credit risk through firmwide oversight across our
global businesses. In addition, we hold other positions that give rise to
credit risk (e.g., bonds and secondary bank loans). These credit risks are
captured as a component of market risk measures, which are monitored and
managed by Market Risk. We also enter into derivatives to manage market risk
exposures. Such derivatives also give rise to credit risk, which is monitored
and managed by Credit Risk.

Credit Risk Management Process

Our process for managing credit risk includes the critical components of our
risk management framework described in the “Overview and Structure of Risk
Management,” as well as the following:

Monitoring compliance with established credit risk limits and reporting our
credit exposures and credit concentrations;  

Establishing or approving underwriting standards;  

Assessing the likelihood that a counterparty will default on its payment
obligations;  

Measuring our current and potential credit exposure and losses resulting from
a counterparty default;  

Using credit risk mitigants, including collateral and hedging; and  

Maximizing recovery through active workout and restructuring of claims.  

We also perform credit reviews, which include initial and ongoing analyses of
our counterparties. For substantially all of our credit exposures, the core of
our process is an annual counterparty credit review. A credit review is an
independent analysis of the capacity and willingness of a counterparty to meet
its financial obligations, resulting in an internal credit rating. The
determination of internal credit ratings also incorporates assumptions with
respect to the nature of and outlook for the counterparty’s industry, and the
economic environment. Senior personnel, with expertise in specific industries,
inspect and approve credit reviews and internal credit ratings.

Our risk assessment process may also include, where applicable, reviewing
certain key metrics, including, but not limited to, delinquency status,
collateral values, FICO credit scores and other risk factors.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Our credit risk management systems capture credit exposure to individual
counterparties and on an aggregate basis to counterparties and their
subsidiaries. These systems also provide management with comprehensive
information about our aggregate credit risk by product, internal credit
rating, industry, country and region.

Risk Measures

We measure our credit risk based on the potential loss in the event of

non-payment

by a counterparty using current and potential exposure. For derivatives and
securities financing transactions, current exposure represents the amount
presently owed to us after taking into account applicable netting and
collateral arrangements, while potential exposure represents our estimate of
the future exposure that could arise over the life of a transaction based on
market movements within a specified confidence level. Potential exposure also
takes into account netting and collateral arrangements. For loans and lending
commitments, the primary measure is a function of the notional amount of the
position.

Stress Tests

We conduct regular stress tests to calculate the credit exposures, including
potential concentrations that would result from applying shocks to
counterparty credit ratings or credit risk factors (e.g., currency rates,
interest rates, equity prices). These shocks cover a wide range of moderate
and more extreme market movements, including shocks to multiple risk factors,
consistent with the occurrence of a severe market or economic event. In the
case of sovereign default, we estimate the direct impact of the default on our
sovereign credit exposures, changes to our credit exposures arising from
potential market moves in response to the default, and the impact of credit
market deterioration on corporate borrowers and counterparties that may result
from the sovereign default. Unlike potential exposure, which is calculated
within a specified confidence level, stress testing does not generally assume
a probability of these events occurring. We also perform firmwide stress
tests. See “Overview and Structure of Risk Management” for information about
firmwide stress tests.

To supplement these regular stress tests, as described above, we also conduct
tailored stress tests on an ad hoc basis in response to specific market events
that we deem significant. We also utilize these stress tests to estimate the
indirect impact of certain hypothetical events on our country exposures, such
as the impact of credit market deterioration on corporate borrowers and
counterparties along with the shocks to the risk factors described above. The
parameters of these shocks vary based on the scenario reflected in each stress
test. We review estimated losses produced by the stress tests in order to
understand their magnitude, highlight potential loss concentrations, and
assess and mitigate our exposures where necessary.

Limits

We use credit risk limits at various levels, as well as underwriting standards
to manage the size and nature of our credit exposures. Limits for industries
and countries are based on our risk appetite and are designed to allow for
regular monitoring, review, escalation and management of credit risk
concentrations. See “Overview and Structure of Risk Management” for
information about the limit approval process.

Credit Risk is responsible for monitoring these limits, and identifying and
escalating to senior management and/or the appropriate risk committee, on a
timely basis, instances where limits have been exceeded.

Risk Mitigants

To reduce our credit exposures on derivatives and securities financing
transactions, we may enter into netting agreements with counterparties that
permit us to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties. We may
also reduce credit risk with counterparties by entering into agreements that
enable us to obtain collateral from them on an upfront or contingent basis
and/or to terminate transactions if the counterparty’s credit rating falls
below a specified level. We monitor the fair value of the collateral to ensure
that our credit exposures are appropriately collateralized. We seek to
minimize exposures where there is a significant positive correlation between
the creditworthiness of our counterparties and the market value of collateral
we receive.

For loans and lending commitments, depending on the credit quality of the
borrower and other characteristics of the transaction, we employ a variety of
potential risk mitigants. Risk mitigants include collateral provisions,
guarantees, covenants, structural seniority of the bank loan claims and, for
certain lending commitments, provisions in the legal documentation that allow
us to adjust loan amounts, pricing, structure and other terms as market
conditions change. The type and structure of risk mitigants employed can
significantly influence the degree of credit risk involved in a loan or
lending commitment.

When we do not have sufficient visibility into a counterparty’s financial
strength or when we believe a counterparty requires support from its parent,
we may obtain third-party guarantees of the counterparty’s obligations. We may
also mitigate our credit risk using credit derivatives or participation
agreements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Credit Exposures

As of December 2021, our aggregate credit exposure increased as compared with
December 2020, primarily reflecting increases in cash deposits with central
banks and loans and lending commitments. The percentage of our credit
exposures arising from

non-investment-grade

counterparties (based on our internally determined public rating agency
equivalents) decreased as compared with December 2020, primarily reflecting an
increase in investment-grade credit exposure related to cash deposits with
central banks. Our credit exposures are described further below.

Cash and Cash Equivalents.

Our credit exposure on cash and cash equivalents arises from our unrestricted
cash, and includes both interest-bearing and

non-interest-bearing

deposits. To mitigate the risk of credit loss, we place substantially all of
our deposits with highly rated banks and central banks.

The table below presents our credit exposure from unrestricted cash and cash
equivalents, and the concentration by industry, region and internally
determined public rating agency equivalents.

The table above excludes cash segregated for regulatory and other purposes of
$24.87 billion as of December 2021 and $24.52 billion as of December 2020.

OTC Derivatives.

Our credit exposure on OTC derivatives arises primarily from our market-making
activities. As a market maker, we enter into derivative transactions to
provide liquidity to clients and to facilitate the transfer and hedging of
their risks. We also enter into derivatives to manage market risk exposures.
We manage our credit exposure on OTC derivatives using the credit risk
process, measures, limits and risk mitigants described above.

We generally enter into OTC derivatives transactions under bilateral
collateral arrangements that require the daily exchange of collateral. As
credit risk is an essential component of fair value, we include a credit
valuation adjustment (CVA) in the fair value of derivatives to reflect
counterparty credit risk, as described in Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements. CVA is a function of the present value of expected exposure, the
probability of counterparty default and the assumed recovery upon default.

The table below presents our net credit exposure from OTC derivatives and the
concentration by industry and region.

Our credit exposure (before any potential recoveries) to OTC derivative
counterparties that defaulted during 2021 remained low, representing less than
2% of our total credit exposure from OTC derivatives.

In the table above:

OTC derivative assets, included in the consolidated balance sheets, are
reported on a

net-by-counterparty

basis (i.e., the net receivable for a given counterparty) when a legal right
of setoff exists under an enforceable netting agreement (counterparty netting)
and are accounted for at fair value, net of cash collateral received under
enforceable credit support agreements (cash collateral netting).  

Collateral represents cash collateral and the fair value of securities
collateral, primarily U.S. and

non-U.S.

government and agency obligations, received under credit support agreements,
that we consider when determining credit risk, but such collateral is not
eligible for netting under U.S. GAAP.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents the distribution of our net credit exposure from OTC
derivatives by tenor.

In the table above:

Tenor is based on remaining contractual maturity.  

Netting includes counterparty netting across tenor categories and collateral
that we consider when determining credit risk (including collateral that is
not eligible for netting under U.S. GAAP). Counterparty netting within the
same tenor category is included within such tenor category.  

The tables below present the distribution of our net credit exposure from OTC
derivatives by tenor and internally determined public rating agency
equivalents.

Lending Activities.

We manage our lending activities using the credit risk process, measures,
limits and risk mitigants described above. Other lending positions, including
secondary trading positions, are risk-managed as a component of market risk.

The table below presents our loans and lending commitments.

See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for information about net
charge-offs on wholesale and consumer loans, as well as past due and
nonaccrual loans accounted for at amortized cost.

Corporate.

Corporate loans and lending commitments include term loans, revolving lines of
credit, letter of credit facilities and bridge loans, and are principally used
for operating and general corporate purposes, or in connection with
acquisitions. Corporate loans may be secured or unsecured, depending on the
loan purpose, the risk profile of the borrower and other factors.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

The table below presents our credit exposure from corporate loans and lending
commitments, and the concentration by industry, region, internally determined
public rating agency equivalents and other credit metrics.

In the table above, credit exposure excludes $4.14 billion as of December 2021
and $3.20 billion as of December 2020 relating to issued letters of credit
which are classified as guarantees in our consolidated financial statements.
See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about guarantees.

Wealth Management.

Wealth management loans and lending commitments are extended to private bank
clients, including wealth management and other clients. These loans are used
to finance investments in both financial and nonfinancial assets, bridge cash
flow timing gaps or provide liquidity for other needs. Substantially all of
such loans are secured by securities, residential real estate, commercial real
estate or other assets.

The table below presents our credit exposure from wealth management loans and
lending commitments, and the concentration by region, internally determined
public rating agency equivalents and other credit metrics.

In the table above, other metrics/unrated loans primarily include loans backed
by residential real estate. Our risk assessment process for such loans include
reviewing certain key metrics, such as

loan-to-value

ratio and delinquency status.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Commercial Real Estate.

Commercial real estate loans and lending commitments include originated loans
and lending commitments (other than those extended to private bank clients)
that are directly or indirectly secured by hotels, retail stores, multifamily
housing complexes and commercial and industrial properties. Commercial real
estate loans and lending commitments also includes loans and lending
commitments extended to clients who warehouse assets that are directly or
indirectly backed by commercial real estate. In addition, commercial real
estate includes loans purchased by us.

The table below presents our credit exposure from commercial real estate loans
and lending commitments, and the concentration by region, internally
determined public rating agency equivalents and other credit metrics.

In the table above, credit exposure includes loans and lending commitments of
$11.65 billion as of December 2021 and $7.88 billion as of December 2020 which
are extended to clients who warehouse assets that are directly or indirectly
backed by commercial real estate.

In addition, we also have credit exposure to certain commercial real estate
loans held for securitization of $922 million as of December 2021 and $503
million as of December 2020. Such loans are included in trading assets in our
consolidated balance sheets.

Residential Real Estate.

Residential real estate loans and lending commitments are extended to clients
(other than those extended to private bank clients) who warehouse assets that
are directly or indirectly secured by residential real estate and also
includes loans purchased by us.

The table below presents our credit exposure from residential real estate
loans and lending commitments, and the concentration by region, internally
determined public rating agency equivalents and other credit metrics.

In the table above:

Credit exposure includes loans and lending commitments of $16.89 billion as of
December 2021 and $5.71 billion as of December 2020 which are extended to
clients who warehouse assets that are directly or indirectly secured by
residential real estate.  

Other metrics/unrated primarily includes loans purchased by us. Our risk
assessment process for such loans includes reviewing certain key metrics, such
as

loan-to-value

ratio, delinquency status, collateral values, expected cash flows and other
risk factors.  

In addition, we also have exposure to residential real estate loans held for
securitization of $11.57 billion as of December 2021 and $5.57 billion as of
December 2020. Such loans are included in trading assets in our consolidated
balance sheets.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Installment and Credit Card Lending.

We originate unsecured installment loans and credit card loans (pursuant to
revolving lines of credit) to consumers in the Americas. The credit card lines
are cancellable by us and therefore do not result in credit exposure.

The table below presents our credit exposure from originated installment and
credit card funded loans, and the concentration by the ten most concentrated
U.S. states.

See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about the credit quality indicators of installment and credit card loans.

Other.

Other loans and lending commitments are extended to clients who warehouse
assets that are directly or indirectly secured by consumer loans, including
auto loans and private student loans, and other assets. Other loans also
includes unsecured consumer and credit card loans purchased by us.

The table below presents our credit exposure from other loans and lending
commitments, and the concentration by region, internally determined public
rating agency equivalents and other credit metrics.

In the table above:

Other metrics/unrated primarily includes consumer and credit card loans
purchased by us. Our risk assessment process for such loans includes reviewing
certain key metrics, such as expected cash flows, delinquency status and other
risk factors.  

In addition, we also have exposure to other loans held for securitization of
$467 million as of December 2021 and $420 million as of December 2020. Such
loans are included in trading assets in our consolidated balance sheets.

Credit Hedges.

To mitigate the credit risk associated with our lending activities, we obtain
credit protection on certain loans and lending commitments through credit
default swaps, both single-name and index-based contracts, and through the
issuance of credit-linked notes.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Securities Financing Transactions.

We enter into securities financing transactions in order to, among other
things, facilitate client activities, invest excess cash, acquire securities
to cover short positions and finance certain activities. We bear credit risk
related to resale agreements and securities borrowed only to the extent that
cash advanced or the value of securities pledged or delivered to the
counterparty exceeds the value of the collateral received. We also have credit
exposure on repurchase agreements and securities loaned to the extent that the
value of securities pledged or delivered to the counterparty for these
transactions exceeds the amount of cash or collateral received. Securities
collateral for these transactions primarily includes U.S. and

non-U.S.

government and agency obligations.

The table below presents our credit exposure from securities financing
transactions and the concentration by industry, region and internally
determined public rating agency equivalents.

The table above reflects both netting agreements and collateral that we
consider when determining credit risk.

Other Credit Exposures.

We are exposed to credit risk from our receivables from brokers, dealers and
clearing organizations and customers and counterparties. Receivables from
brokers, dealers and clearing organizations primarily consist of initial
margin placed with clearing organizations and receivables related to sales of
securities which have traded, but not yet settled. These receivables generally
have minimal credit risk due to the low probability of clearing organization
default and the short-term nature of receivables related to securities
settlements. Receivables from customers and counterparties generally consist
of collateralized receivables related to customer securities transactions and
generally have minimal credit risk due to both the value of the collateral
received and the short-term nature of these receivables.

The table below presents our other credit exposures and the concentration by
industry, region and internally determined public rating agency equivalents.

The table above reflects collateral that we consider when determining credit
risk.

Selected Exposures

We have credit and market exposures, as described below, that have had
heightened focus given recent events and broad market concerns. Credit
exposure represents the potential for loss due to the default or deterioration
in credit quality of a counterparty or borrower. Market exposure represents
the potential for loss in value of our long and short positions due to changes
in market prices.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Country Exposures.

High external funding needs and inconsistent monetary policy have led to
significant depreciation of the Turkish Lira, prompting concerns about foreign
exchange reserves and economic instability. As of December 2021, our total
credit exposure to Turkey was $1.39 billion, which was to

non-sovereign

counterparties or borrowers. Such exposure consisted of $663 million related
to OTC derivatives, $160 million related to loans and lending commitments and
$567 million related to secured receivables. After taking into consideration
the benefit of hedges and Turkish corporate and sovereign collateral, and
other risk mitigants provided by Turkish counterparties, our net credit
exposure was $290 million. In addition, our total market exposure to Turkey as
of December 2021 was $105 million, primarily to

non-sovereign

issuers or underliers. Such exposure consisted of $179 million related to
debt, $(156) million related to credit derivatives and $82 million related to
equities.

The potential for further sanctions on Russia has led to concerns about its
economic and financial stability. As of December 2021, our total credit
exposure to Russia was $650 million, substantially all of which was to

non-sovereign

counterparties or borrowers. Such exposure consisted of $134 million related
to OTC derivatives, $177 million related to loans and lending commitments and
$339 million related to secured receivables. After taking into consideration
the benefit of Russian corporate and sovereign collateral, and other risk
mitigants provided by Russian counterparties, our net credit exposure was $293
million. In addition, our total market exposure to Russia as of December 2021
was $414 million, primarily to

non-sovereign

issuers or underliers. Such exposure consisted of $258 million related to
debt, $(531) million related to credit derivatives and $687 million related to
equities.

Liquidity pressures prompted the Argentine government to default and
restructure local and foreign obligations in 2020. Economic challenges persist
and the country still needs to secure new financial terms with the IMF. As of
December 2021, our total credit exposure to Argentina was $102 million, which
was to

non-sovereign

counterparties or borrowers, and was primarily related to loans and lending
commitments. In addition, our total market exposure to Argentina as of
December 2021 was $91 million, primarily to sovereign issuers or underliers.
Such exposure consisted of $70 million related to debt, $(14) million related
to credit derivatives and $35 million related to equities.

Escalating geopolitical conflict has led to concerns about Ukraine’s political
and financial stability. As of December 2021, our total credit exposure to
Ukraine was not material. Our total market exposure to Ukraine as of December
2021 was $236 million, primarily to sovereign issuers or underliers. Such
exposure consisted of $164 million related to debt, $30 million related to
credit derivatives and $42 million related to equities.

Lebanon’s sovereign debt default and sharp currency depreciation have led to
concerns about its financial and political stability. As of December 2021, our
total credit and market exposure to Lebanon was not material.

Zambia’s sovereign debt default and liquidity pressures aggravated by the

COVID-19

pandemic have led to concerns about the country’s financial stability. As of
December 2021, our total credit and market exposure to Zambia was not
material.

Venezuela has delayed payments on its sovereign debt and is experiencing deep
economic and social crises. As of December 2021, our total credit and market
exposure to Venezuela was not material.

Escalating political unrest in Ethiopia has led to concerns about the
country’s political, economic and financial stability. As of December 2021,
our total credit and market exposure to Ethiopia was not material.

We have a comprehensive framework to monitor, measure and assess our country
exposures and to determine our risk appetite. We determine the country of risk
by the location of the counterparty, issuer or underlier’s assets, where they
generate revenue, the country in which they are headquartered, the
jurisdiction where a claim against them could be enforced, and/or the
government whose policies affect their ability to repay their obligations. We
monitor our credit exposure to a specific country both at the individual
counterparty level, as well as at the aggregate country level. See “Stress
Tests” for information about stress tests that are designed to estimate the
direct and indirect impact of events involving the above countries.

Operational Risk Management

Overview

Operational risk is the risk of an adverse outcome resulting from inadequate
or failed internal processes, people, systems or from external events. Our
exposure to operational risk arises from routine processing errors, as well as
extraordinary incidents, such as major systems failures or legal and
regulatory matters.

Potential types of loss events related to internal and external operational
risk include:

Execution, delivery and process management;  

Business disruption and system failures;  

Employment practices and workplace safety;  

Clients, products and business practices;  

Damage to physical assets;  

Internal fraud; and  

External fraud.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Operational Risk, which is independent of our revenue-producing units and
reports to our chief risk officer, has primary responsibility for developing
and implementing a formalized framework for assessing, monitoring and managing
operational risk with the goal of maintaining our exposure to operational risk
at levels that are within our risk appetite.

Operational Risk Management Process

Our process for managing operational risk includes the critical components of
our risk management framework described in the “Overview and Structure of Risk
Management,” including a comprehensive data collection process, as well as
firmwide policies and procedures, for operational risk events.

We combine

top-down

and

bottom-up

approaches to manage and measure operational risk. From a

top-down

perspective, our senior management assesses firmwide and business-level
operational risk profiles. From a

bottom-up

perspective, our first and second lines of defense are responsible for risk
identification and risk management on a

day-to-day

basis, including escalating operational risks and risk events to senior
management.

We maintain a comprehensive control framework designed to provide a well-
controlled environment to minimize operational risks. The Firmwide Operational
Risk and Resilience Committee is responsible for overseeing operational risk,
and for ensuring our business and operational resilience.

Our operational risk management framework is designed to comply with the
operational risk measurement rules under the Capital Framework and has evolved
based on the changing needs of our businesses and regulatory guidance.

We have established policies that require all employees to report and escalate
operational risk events. When operational risk events are identified, our
policies require that the events be documented and analyzed to determine
whether changes are required in our systems and/or processes to further
mitigate the risk of future events.

We use operational risk management applications to capture, analyze, aggregate
and report operational risk event data and key metrics. One of our key risk
identification and assessment tools is an operational risk and control self-
assessment process, which is performed by our managers. This process consists
of the identification and rating of operational risks, on a forward-looking
basis, and the related controls. The results from this process are analyzed to
evaluate operational risk exposures and identify businesses, activities or
products with heightened levels of operational risk.

Risk Measurement

We measure our operational risk exposure using both statistical modeling and
scenario analyses, which involve qualitative and quantitative assessments of
internal and external operational risk event data and internal control factors
for each of our businesses. Operational risk measurement also incorporates an
assessment of business environment factors, including:

Evaluations of the complexity of our business activities;  

The degree of automation in our processes;  

New activity information;  

The legal and regulatory environment; and  

Changes in the markets for our products and services, including the diversity
and sophistication of our customers and counterparties.  

The results from these scenario analyses are used to monitor changes in
operational risk and to determine business lines that may have heightened
exposure to operational risk. These analyses are used in the determination of
the appropriate level of operational risk capital to hold. We also perform
firmwide stress tests. See “Overview and Structure of Risk Management” for
information about firmwide stress tests.

Types of Operational Risks

Increased reliance on technology and third-party relationships has resulted in
increased operational risks, such as information and cyber security risk,
third-party risk and business resilience risk. We manage those risks as
follows:

Information and Cyber Security Risk.

Information and cyber security risk is the risk of compromising the
confidentiality, integrity or availability of our data and systems, leading to
an adverse impact to us, our reputation, our clients and/or the broader
financial system. We seek to minimize the occurrence and impact of
unauthorized access, disruption or use of information and/or information
systems. We deploy and operate preventive and detective controls and processes
to mitigate emerging and evolving information security and cyber security
threats, including monitoring our network for known vulnerabilities and signs
of unauthorized attempts to access our data and systems. There is increased
information risk through diversification of our data across external service
providers, including use of a variety of cloud-provided or -hosted services
and applications. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

for further information about information and cyber security risk.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Management’s Discussion and Analysis

Third-Party Risk.

Third-party risk, including vendor risk, is the risk of an adverse impact due
to reliance on third parties performing services or activities on our behalf.
These risks may include legal, regulatory, information security, reputational,
operational or any other risks inherent in engaging a third party. We
identify, manage and report key third-party risks and conduct due diligence
across multiple risk domains, including information security and cyber
security, resilience and additional third-party dependencies. The Third-Party
Risk Program monitors, reviews and reassesses third-party risks on an ongoing
basis. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this

Form 10-K

for further information about third-party risk.

Business Resilience Risk.

Business resilience risk is the risk of disruption to our critical processes.
We monitor threats and assess risks and seek to ensure our state of readiness
in the event of a significant operational disruption to the normal operations
of our critical functions or their dependencies, such as critical facilities,
systems, third parties, data and/or personnel. We approach BCP through the
lens of business and operational resilience. The resilience framework defines
the fundamental principles for BCP and crisis management to ensure that
critical functions can continue to operate in the event of a disruption. The
business continuity program is comprehensive, consistent firmwide and

up-to-date,

incorporating new information, techniques and technologies as and when they
become available, and our resilience recovery plans incorporate and test
specific and measurable recovery time objectives in accordance with local
market best practices and regulatory requirements, and under specific
scenarios. See “Regulatory and Other Matters — Other Matters” for information
about the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic. See “Business — Business Continuity and Information Security” in
Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K

for further information about business continuity.

Model Risk Management

Overview

Model risk is the potential for adverse consequences from decisions made based
on model outputs that may be incorrect or used inappropriately. We rely on
quantitative models across our business activities primarily to value certain
financial assets and liabilities, to monitor and manage our risk, and to
measure and monitor our regulatory capital.

Model Risk, which is independent of our revenue-producing units, model
developers, model owners and model users, and reports to our chief risk
officer, has primary responsibility for assessing, monitoring and managing our
model risk through firmwide oversight across our global businesses, and
provides periodic updates to senior management, risk committees and the Risk
Committee of the Board.

Our model risk management framework is managed through a governance structure
and risk management controls, which encompass standards designed to ensure we
maintain a comprehensive model inventory, including risk assessment and
classification, sound model development practices, independent review and
model-specific usage controls. The Firmwide Model Risk Control Committee
oversees our model risk management framework.

Model Review and Validation Process

Model Risk consists of quantitative professionals who perform an independent
review, validation and approval of our models. This review includes an
analysis of the model documentation, independent testing, an assessment of the
appropriateness of the methodology used, and verification of compliance with
model development and implementation standards.

We regularly refine and enhance our models to reflect changes in market or
economic conditions and our business mix. All models are reviewed on an annual
basis, and new models or significant changes to existing models and their
assumptions are approved prior to implementation.

The model validation process incorporates a review of models and trade and
risk parameters across a broad range of scenarios (including extreme
conditions) in order to critically evaluate and verify:

The model’s conceptual soundness, including the reasonableness of model
assumptions, and suitability for intended use;  

The testing strategy utilized by the model developers to ensure that the
models function as intended;  

The suitability of the calculation techniques incorporated in the model;  

The model’s accuracy in reflecting the characteristics of the related product
and its significant risks;  

The model’s consistency with models for similar products; and  

The model’s sensitivity to input parameters and assumptions.  

See “Critical Accounting Policies — Fair Value — Review of Valuation Models,”
“Liquidity Risk Management,” “Market Risk Management,” “Credit Risk
Management” and “Operational Risk Management” for further information about
our use of models within these areas.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk

Quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk are set forth in
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations — Risk Management” in Part II, Item 7 of this

Form 10-K.

Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data

Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting

Management of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., together with its consolidated
subsidiaries (the firm), is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting. The firm’s internal
control over financial reporting is a process designed under the supervision
of the firm’s principal executive and principal financial officers to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of the firm’s financial statements for external reporting purposes
in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.

As of December 31, 2021, management conducted an assessment of the firm’s
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework established
in

Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013)

issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO). Based on this assessment, management has determined that the firm’s
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021 was
effective.

Our internal control over financial reporting includes policies and procedures
that pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect transactions and dispositions of assets; provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only
in accordance with authorizations of management and the directors of the firm;
and provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the firm’s assets that could
have a material effect on our financial statements.

The firm’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021
has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PCAOB ID 238), an independent
registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on
pages 118 to 120, which expresses an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness
of the firm’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.:

Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial
Reporting

We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of The Goldman
Sachs Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the Company) as of December 31, 2021
and 2020, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, of
comprehensive income, of changes in shareholders’ equity and of cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, including the
related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial
statements”). We also have audited the Company’s internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in

Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013)

issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO).

In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations
and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December
31, 2021 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in

Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013)

issued by the COSO.

Change in Accounting Principle

As discussed in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company
changed the manner in which it accounts for credit losses on certain financial
instruments in 2020.

Basis for Opinions

The Company’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial
statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial
reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting, included in Management’s Report on Internal Control
over Financial Reporting appearing on page 117. Our responsibility is to
express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We
are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent
with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities
laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the PCAOB.

We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of
material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects.

Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing
procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated
financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures
that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test
basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated
financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk
that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and
operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our
audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting

A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets
of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts
and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.

Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting
may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation
of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

Critical Audit Matters

The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the
current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that were
communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that
(i) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated
financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective,
or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not
alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken
as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below,
providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts
or disclosures to which they relate.

Valuation of Certain Level 3 Financial Instruments

As described in Notes 4 through 10 to the consolidated financial statements,
as of December 31, 2021, the Company carries financial instruments at fair
value, which includes $24.1 billion of financial assets and $29.2 billion of
financial liabilities classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, as
one or more inputs to the financial instrument’s valuation technique are
significant and unobservable. Significant unobservable inputs used by
management to value certain of these Level 3 financial instruments included
(i) industry multiples and public comparables, (ii) credit spreads or (iii)
correlation.

The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures
relating to the valuation of these certain Level 3 financial instruments is a
critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment by management in
valuing the financial instruments, which in turn led to a high degree of
auditor judgment, subjectivity, and effort in performing procedures and
evaluating audit evidence related to the aforementioned significant
unobservable inputs used in the valuation of certain Level 3 financial
instruments, and (ii) the audit effort involved the use of professionals with
specialized skill and knowledge.

Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit
evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated
financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the valuation of financial instruments, including
controls over the methods and significant unobservable inputs used in the
valuation of certain Level 3 financial instruments. These procedures also
included, among others, for a sample of financial instruments, the involvement
of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge to assist in (i)
developing an independent estimate of fair value or (ii) testing management’s
process to determine the fair value of these financial instruments. Developing
the independent estimate involved (i) testing the completeness and accuracy of
data provided by management, (ii) evaluating and utilizing management’s
significant unobservable inputs or developing independent significant
unobservable inputs, and (iii) comparing management’s estimate to the
independently developed estimate of fair value. Testing management’s process
included evaluating the reasonableness of the aforementioned significant
unobservable inputs, evaluating the appropriateness of the techniques used,
and testing the completeness and accuracy of data used by management to
determine the fair value of these instruments.

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

Allowance for Loan Losses — Wholesale Loan Portfolio

As described in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company’s
allowance for loan losses for the wholesale loan portfolio reflects
management’s estimate of loan losses over the remaining expected life of the
loans and also considers forecasts of future economic conditions. As of
December 31, 2021, $2.1 billion of the allowance for loan losses and $131.6
billion of the loans accounted for at amortized cost related to the wholesale
loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses for the wholesale loan portfolio
is measured on a collective basis for loans that exhibit similar risk
characteristics using a modeled approach and asset-specific basis for loans
that do not share similar risk characteristics. In addition, it includes
qualitative components to reflect the uncertain nature of economic
forecasting, capture uncertainty regarding model inputs, and account for model
imprecision and concentration risk. The wholesale models determine the
probability of default and loss given default based on various risk factors,
including internal credit ratings, industry default and loss data, expected
life, macroeconomic indicators, the borrower’s capacity to meet its financial
obligations, the borrower’s country of risk and industry, loan seniority and
collateral type. The most significant inputs to the forecast model for
wholesale loans include forecasted U.S. unemployment rates, GDP, credit
spreads, commercial and industrial delinquency rates, short- and long-term
interest rates, and oil prices.

The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures
relating to the allowance for loan losses for the wholesale loan portfolio is
a critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment and estimation by
management in the determinations of internal credit ratings and the forecasted
U.S. unemployment rates, which in turn led to a high degree of auditor
judgment, subjectivity, and effort in performing procedures and evaluating
audit evidence related to management’s determinations, and (ii) the audit
effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge.

Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit
evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated
financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of
controls relating to the Company’s allowance for loan losses for the wholesale
loan portfolio, including controls over the model, certain data, and
significant assumptions. These procedures also included, among others, testing
management’s process for estimating the allowance for loan losses for the
wholesale loan portfolio using a modeled approach, which involved evaluating
the appropriateness of the methodology and testing the completeness and
accuracy of certain data used in estimating the allowance for loan losses. The
procedures also involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and
knowledge to assist in evaluating (i) the appropriateness of the model and
methodology and (ii) the reasonableness of the internal credit ratings and the
forecasted U.S. unemployment rates used in estimating the allowance for loan
losses for the wholesale loan portfolio.

/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

New York, New York

February 24, 2022

We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1922.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Consolidated Statements of Earnings

Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Consolidated Balance Sheets

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows

See Notes 12 and 16 for information about

non-cash

activities.

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 1.

Description of Business

The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. (Group Inc. or parent company), a Delaware
corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the
firm), is a leading global financial institution that delivers a broad range
of financial services across investment banking, securities, investment
management and consumer banking to a large and diversified client base that
includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals.
Founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in New York and maintains offices
in all major financial centers around the world.

The firm reports its activities in four business segments:

Investment Banking

The firm provides a broad range of investment banking services to a diverse
group of corporations, financial institutions, investment funds and
governments. Services include strategic advisory assignments with respect to
mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities,
restructurings and spin-offs, and equity and debt underwriting of public
offerings and private placements. The firm also provides lending to corporate
clients, including relationship lending, middle-market lending and acquisition
financing. The firm also provides transaction banking services to certain
corporate clients.

Global Markets

The firm facilitates client transactions and makes markets in fixed income,
equity, currency and commodity products with institutional clients, such as
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds and governments. The
firm also makes markets in and clears institutional client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide and provides prime
brokerage and other equities financing activities, including securities
lending, margin lending and swaps. The firm also provides financing to clients
through securities purchased under agreements to resell (resale agreements),
and through structured credit, warehouse and asset-backed lending.

Asset Management

The firm manages assets and offers investment products (primarily through
separately managed accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse set of
institutional clients and a network of third-party distributors around the
world. The firm makes equity investments, which include alternative investing
activities related to public and private equity investments in corporate, real
estate and infrastructure assets, as well as investments through consolidated
investment entities, substantially all of which are engaged in real estate
investment activities. The firm also invests in corporate debt and provides
financing for real estate and other assets.

Consumer & Wealth Management

The firm provides investing and wealth advisory solutions, including financial
planning and counseling, executing brokerage transactions and managing assets
for individuals in its wealth management business. The firm also provides
loans, accepts deposits and provides investing services through its consumer
banking digital platform,

Marcus by Goldman Sachs

, and through its private bank, as well as issues credit cards to consumers.

Note 2.

Basis of Presentation

These consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP) and
include the accounts of Group Inc. and all other entities in which the firm
has a controlling financial interest. Intercompany transactions and balances
have been eliminated.

All references to 2021, 2020 and 2019 refer to the firm’s years ended, or the
dates, as the context requires, December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and
December 31, 2019, respectively. Any reference to a future year refers to a
year ending on December 31 of that year. Certain reclassifications have been
made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current presentation.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 3.

Significant Accounting Policies

The firm’s significant accounting policies include when and how to measure the
fair value of assets and liabilities, measuring the allowance for credit
losses on loans and lending commitments accounted for at amortized cost, and
when to consolidate an entity. See Note 4 for policies on fair value
measurements, Note 9 for policies on the allowance for credit losses, and
below and Note 17 for policies on consolidation accounting. All other
significant accounting policies are either described below or included in the
following footnotes:

Fair Value Measurements

 Note 4

Trading Assets and Liabilities

 Note 5

Trading Cash Instruments

 Note 6

Derivatives and Hedging Activities

 Note 7

Investments

 Note 8

Loans

 Note 9

Fair Value Option

 Note 10

Collateralized Agreements and Financings

 Note 11

Other Assets

 Note 12

Deposits

 Note 13

Unsecured Borrowings

 Note 14

Other Liabilities

 Note 15

Securitization Activities

 Note 16

Variable Interest Entities

 Note 17

Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees

 Note 18

Shareholders’ Equity

 Note 19

Regulation and Capital Adequacy

 Note 20

Earnings Per Common Share

 Note 21

Transactions with Affiliated Funds

 Note 22

Interest Income and Interest Expense

 Note 23

Income Taxes

 Note 24

Business Segments

 Note 25

Credit Concentrations

 Note 26

Legal Proceedings

 Note 27

Employee Benefit Plans

 Note 28

Employee Incentive Plans

 Note 29

Parent Company

 Note 30

Consolidation

The firm consolidates entities in which the firm has a controlling financial
interest. The firm determines whether it has a controlling financial interest
in an entity by first evaluating whether the entity is a voting interest
entity or a variable interest entity (VIE).

Voting Interest Entities.

Voting interest entities are entities in which (i) the total equity investment
at risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance its activities
independently and (ii) the equity holders have the power to direct the
activities of the entity that most significantly impact its economic
performance, the obligation to absorb the losses of the entity and the right
to receive the residual returns of the entity. The usual condition for a
controlling financial interest in a voting interest entity is ownership of a
majority voting interest. If the firm has a controlling majority voting
interest in a voting interest entity, the entity is consolidated.

Variable Interest Entities.

A VIE is an entity that lacks one or more of the characteristics of a voting
interest entity. The firm has a controlling financial interest in a VIE when
the firm has a variable interest or interests that provide it with (i) the
power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the
VIE’s economic performance and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses of the VIE
or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be
significant to the VIE. See Note 17 for further information about VIEs.

Equity-Method Investments.

When the firm does not have a controlling financial interest in an entity but
can exert significant influence over the entity’s operating and financial
policies, the investment is generally accounted for at fair value by electing
the fair value option available under U.S. GAAP. Significant influence
generally exists when the firm owns 20% to 50% of the entity’s common stock or

in-substance

common stock.

In certain cases, the firm applies the equity method of accounting to new
investments that are strategic in nature or closely related to the firm’s
principal business activities, when the firm has a significant degree of
involvement in the cash flows or operations of the investee or when cost-
benefit considerations are less significant. See Note 8 for further
information about equity-method investments.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Investment Funds.

The firm has formed investment funds with third-party investors. These funds
are typically organized as limited partnerships or limited liability companies
for which the firm acts as general partner or manager. Generally, the firm
does not hold a majority of the economic interests in these funds. These funds
are usually voting interest entities and generally are not consolidated
because third-party investors typically have rights to terminate the funds or
to remove the firm as general partner or manager. Investments in these funds
are generally measured at net asset value (NAV) and are included in
investments. See Notes 8, 18 and 22 for further information about investments
in funds.

Use of Estimates

Preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to
make certain estimates and assumptions, the most important of which relate to
fair value measurements, the allowance for credit losses on loans and lending
commitments accounted for at amortized cost, accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, provisions for losses that may arise from
litigation and regulatory proceedings (including governmental investigations),
and accounting for income taxes. These estimates and assumptions are based on
the best available information but actual results could be materially
different.

Revenue Recognition

Financial Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value.

Trading assets and liabilities and certain investments are carried at fair
value either under the fair value option or in accordance with other U.S.
GAAP. In addition, the firm has elected to account for certain of its loans
and other financial assets and liabilities at fair value by electing the fair
value option. The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that
would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Financial assets are marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked
to offer prices. Fair value measurements do not include transaction costs.
Fair value gains or losses are generally included in market making or other
principal transactions. See Note 4 for further information about fair value
measurements.

Revenue from Contracts with Clients.

The firm recognizes revenue earned from contracts with clients for services,
such as investment banking, investment management, and execution and clearing
(contracts with clients), when the performance obligations related to the
underlying transaction are completed.

Revenues from contracts with clients represent approximately 45% of total

non-interest

revenues for both 2021 and 2020 (including approximately 90% of investment
banking revenues, approximately 95% of investment management revenues and all
commissions and fees), and approximately 45% of total non-interest revenues
for 2019 (including approximately 85% of investment banking revenues,
approximately 95% of investment management revenues and all commissions and
fees). See Note 25 for information about net revenues by business segment.

Investment Banking

Advisory.

Fees from financial advisory assignments are recognized in revenues when the
services related to the underlying transaction are completed under the terms
of the assignment.

Non-refundable

deposits and milestone payments in connection with financial advisory
assignments are recognized in revenues upon completion of the underlying
transaction or when the assignment is otherwise concluded.

Expenses associated with financial advisory assignments are recognized when
incurred and are included in transaction based expenses. Client reimbursements
for such expenses are included in investment banking revenues.

Underwriting.

Fees from underwriting assignments are recognized in revenues upon completion
of the underlying transaction based on the terms of the assignment.

Expenses associated with underwriting assignments are generally deferred until
the related revenue is recognized or the assignment is otherwise concluded.
Such expenses are included in transaction based expenses for completed
assignments.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Investment Management

The firm earns management fees and incentive fees for investment management
services, which are included in investment management revenues. The firm makes
payments to brokers and advisors related to the placement of the firm’s
investment funds (distribution fees), which are included in transaction based
expenses.

Management Fees.

Management fees for mutual funds are calculated as a percentage of daily net
asset value and are received monthly. Management fees for hedge funds and
separately managed accounts are calculated as a percentage of

month-end

net asset value and are generally received quarterly. Management fees for
private equity funds are calculated as a percentage of monthly invested
capital or committed capital and are received quarterly, semi-annually or
annually, depending on the fund. Management fees are recognized over time in
the period the services are provided.

Distribution fees paid by the firm are calculated based on either a percentage
of the management fee, the investment fund’s net asset value or the committed
capital. Such fees are included in transaction based expenses.

Incentive Fees.

Incentive fees are calculated as a percentage of a fund’s or separately
managed account’s return, or excess return above a specified benchmark or
other performance target. Incentive fees are generally based on investment
performance over a twelve-month period or over the life of a fund. Fees that
are based on performance over a twelve-month period are subject to adjustment
prior to the end of the measurement period. For fees that are based on
investment performance over the life of the fund, future investment
underperformance may require fees previously distributed to the firm to be
returned to the fund.

Incentive fees earned from a fund or separately managed account are recognized
when it is probable that a significant reversal of such fees will not occur,
which is generally when such fees are no longer subject to fluctuations in the
market value of investments held by the fund or separately managed account.
Therefore, incentive fees recognized during the period may relate to
performance obligations satisfied in previous periods.

Commissions and Fees

The firm earns commissions and fees from executing and clearing client
transactions on stock, options and futures markets, as well as

over-the-counter

(OTC) transactions. Commissions and fees are recognized on the day the trade
is executed. The firm also provides third-party research services to clients
in connection with certain soft-dollar arrangements. Third-party research
costs incurred by the firm in connection with such arrangements are presented
net within commissions and fees.

Remaining Performance Obligations

Remaining performance obligations are services that the firm has committed to
perform in the future in connection with its contracts with clients. The
firm’s remaining performance obligations are generally related to its
financial advisory assignments and certain investment management activities.
Revenues associated with remaining performance obligations relating to
financial advisory assignments cannot be determined until the outcome of the
transaction. For the firm’s investment management activities, where fees are
calculated based on the net asset value of the fund or separately managed
account, future revenues associated with such remaining performance
obligations cannot be determined as such fees are subject to fluctuations in
the market value of investments held by the fund or separately managed
account.

The firm is able to determine the future revenues associated with management
fees calculated based on committed capital. As of December 2021, substantially
all future net revenues associated with such remaining performance obligations
will be recognized through 2029. Annual revenues associated with such
performance obligations average less than $250 million through 2029.

Transfers of Financial Assets

Transfers of financial assets are accounted for as sales when the firm has
relinquished control over the assets transferred. For transfers of financial
assets accounted for as sales, any gains or losses are recognized in net
revenues. Assets or liabilities that arise from the firm’s continuing
involvement with transferred financial assets are initially recognized at fair
value. For transfers of financial assets that are not accounted for as sales,
the assets are generally included in trading assets and the transfer is
accounted for as a collateralized financing, with the related interest expense
recognized over the life of the transaction. See Note 11 for further
information about transfers of financial assets accounted for as
collateralized financings and Note 16 for further information about transfers
of financial assets accounted for as sales.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Cash and Cash Equivalents

The firm defines cash equivalents as highly liquid overnight deposits held in
the ordinary course of business. Cash and cash equivalents included cash and
due from banks of $10.14 billion as of December 2021 and $11.95 billion as of
December 2020. Cash and cash equivalents also included interest-bearing
deposits with banks of $250.90 billion as of December 2021 and $143.89 billion
as of December 2020.

The firm segregates cash for regulatory and other purposes related to client
activity. Cash and cash equivalents segregated for regulatory and other
purposes were $24.87 billion as of December 2021 and $24.52 billion as of
December 2020. In addition, the firm segregates securities for regulatory and
other purposes related to client activity. See Note 11 for further information
about segregated securities.

Customer and Other Receivables

Customer and other receivables included receivables from customers and
counterparties of $103.82 billion as of December 2021 and $82.39 billion as of
December 2020, and receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing
organizations of $56.85 billion as of December 2021 and $38.94 billion as of
December 2020. Such receivables primarily consist of customer margin loans,
receivables resulting from unsettled transactions and collateral posted in
connection with certain derivative transactions.

Substantially all of these receivables are accounted for at amortized cost net
of any allowance for credit losses, which generally approximates fair value.
As these receivables are not accounted for at fair value, they are not
included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy in Notes 4 through 10. Had these
receivables been included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy, substantially
all would have been classified in level 2 as of both December 2021 and
December 2020. See Note 10 for further information about customer and other
receivables accounted for at fair value under the fair value option. Interest
on customer and other receivables is recognized over the life of the
transaction and included in interest income.

Customer and other receivables includes receivables from contracts with
clients and contract assets. Contract assets represent the firm’s right to
receive consideration for services provided in connection with its contracts
with clients for which collection is conditional and not merely subject to the
passage of time. The firm’s receivables from contracts with clients were $3.01
billion as of December 2021 and $2.60 billion as of December 2020. As of both
December 2021 and December 2020 contract assets were not material.

Customer and Other Payables

Customer and other payables included payables to customers and counterparties
of $241.93 billion as of December 2021 and $183.57 billion as of December
2020, and payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations of $10.00
billion as of December 2021 and $7.09 billion as of December 2020. Such
payables primarily consist of customer credit balances related to the firm’s
prime brokerage activities. Customer and other payables are accounted for at
cost plus accrued interest, which generally approximates fair value. As these
payables are not accounted for at fair value, they are not included in the
firm’s fair value hierarchy in Notes 4 through 10. Had these payables been
included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been
classified in level 2 as of both December 2021 and December 2020. Interest on
customer and other payables is recognized over the life of the transaction and
included in interest expense.

Offsetting Assets and Liabilities

To reduce credit exposures on derivatives and securities financing
transactions, the firm may enter into master netting agreements or similar
arrangements (collectively, netting agreements) with counterparties that
permit it to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties. A
netting agreement is a contract with a counterparty that permits net
settlement of multiple transactions with that counterparty, including upon the
exercise of termination rights by a

non-defaulting

party. Upon exercise of such termination rights, all transactions governed by
the netting agreement are terminated and a net settlement amount is
calculated. In addition, the firm receives and posts cash and securities
collateral with respect to its derivatives and securities financing
transactions, subject to the terms of the related credit support agreements or
similar arrangements (collectively, credit support agreements). An enforceable
credit support agreement grants the

non-defaulting

party exercising termination rights the right to liquidate the collateral and
apply the proceeds to any amounts owed. In order to assess enforceability of
the firm’s right of setoff under netting and credit support agreements, the
firm evaluates various factors, including applicable bankruptcy laws, local
statutes and regulatory provisions in the jurisdiction of the parties to the
agreement.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Derivatives are reported on a

net-by-counterparty

basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for derivative assets and
liabilities for a given counterparty) in the consolidated balance sheets when
a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable netting agreement. Resale
agreements and securities sold under agreements to repurchase (repurchase
agreements) and securities borrowed and loaned transactions with the same term
and currency are presented on a

net-by-counterparty

basis in the consolidated balance sheets when such transactions meet certain
settlement criteria and are subject to netting agreements.

In the consolidated balance sheets, derivatives are reported net of cash
collateral received and posted under enforceable credit support agreements,
when transacted under an enforceable netting agreement. In the consolidated
balance sheets, resale and repurchase agreements, and securities borrowed and
loaned, are not reported net of the related cash and securities received or
posted as collateral. See Note 11 for further information about collateral
received and pledged, including rights to deliver or repledge collateral. See
Notes 7 and 11 for further information about offsetting assets and
liabilities.

Foreign Currency Translation

Assets and liabilities denominated in

non-U.S.

currencies are translated at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of the
consolidated balance sheets and revenues and expenses are translated at
average rates of exchange for the period. Foreign currency remeasurement gains
or losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are recognized in
earnings. Gains or losses on translation of the financial statements of a

non-U.S.

operation, when the functional currency is other than the U.S. dollar, are
included, net of hedges and taxes, in the consolidated statements of
comprehensive income.

Recent Accounting Developments

Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (ASC 326).

In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU

No. 2016-13,

“Financial Instruments — Credit Losses (Topic 326) — Measurement of Credit
Losses on Financial Instruments.” This ASU amends several aspects of the
measurement of credit losses on certain financial instruments, including
replacing the existing incurred credit loss model and other models with the
Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL) model and amending certain aspects of
accounting for purchased financial assets with deterioration in credit quality
since origination.

The firm adopted this ASU in January 2020 under a modified retrospective
approach. As a result of adopting this ASU, the firm’s allowance for credit
losses on financial assets and commitments that are measured at amortized cost
reflects management’s estimate of credit losses over the remaining expected
life of such assets. Expected credit losses for newly recognized financial
assets and commitments, as well as changes to expected credit losses during
the period, are recognized in earnings. These expected credit losses are
measured based on historical experience, current conditions and forecasts that
affect the collectability of the reported amount.

The cumulative effect of measuring the allowance under CECL as a result of
adopting this ASU as of January 1, 2020 was an increase in the allowance for
credit losses of $848 million. The increase in the allowance is driven by the
fact that the allowance under CECL covers expected credit losses over the full
expected life of the loan portfolios and also takes into account forecasts of
expected future economic conditions. In addition, in accordance with the ASU,
the firm elected the fair value option for loans that were previously
accounted for as Purchased Credit Impaired (PCI), which resulted in a decrease
to the allowance for PCI loans of $169 million. The cumulative effect of
adopting this ASU was a decrease to retained earnings of $638 million (net of
tax).

Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting
(ASC 848).

In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU

No. 2020-04,

“Reference Rate Reform — Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform
on Financial Reporting.” This ASU provides optional relief from applying
generally accepted accounting principles to contracts, hedging relationships
and other transactions affected by reference rate reform. In addition, in
January 2021 the FASB issued ASU

No. 2021-01,

“Reference Rate Reform — Scope,” which clarified the scope of ASC 848 relating
to contract modifications. The firm adopted these ASUs upon issuance and
elected to apply the relief available to certain modified derivatives. The
adoption of these ASUs did not have a material impact on the firm’s
consolidated financial statements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 4.

Fair Value Measurements

The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received
to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date. Financial assets are
marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices.
Fair value measurements do not include transaction costs. The firm measures
certain financial assets and liabilities as a portfolio (i.e., based on its
net exposure to market and/or credit risks).

The best evidence of fair value is a quoted price in an active market. If
quoted prices in active markets are not available, fair value is determined by
reference to prices for similar instruments, quoted prices or recent
transactions in less active markets, or internally developed models that
primarily use market-based or independently sourced inputs, including, but not
limited to, interest rates, volatilities, equity or debt prices, foreign
exchange rates, commodity prices, credit spreads and funding spreads (i.e.,
the spread or difference between the interest rate at which a borrower could
finance a given financial instrument relative to a benchmark interest rate).

U.S. GAAP has a three-level hierarchy for disclosure of fair value
measurements. This hierarchy prioritizes inputs to the valuation techniques
used to measure fair value, giving the highest priority to level 1 inputs and
the lowest priority to level 3 inputs. A financial instrument’s level in this
hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to its
fair value measurement. In evaluating the significance of a valuation input,
the firm considers, among other factors, a portfolio’s net risk exposure to
that input. The fair value hierarchy is as follows:

Level 1.

Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets to which the firm had
access at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or
liabilities.

Level 2.

Inputs to valuation techniques are observable, either directly or indirectly.

Level 3.

One or more inputs to valuation techniques are significant and unobservable.

The fair values for substantially all of the firm’s financial assets and
liabilities are based on observable prices and inputs and are classified in
levels 1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Certain level 2 and level 3
financial assets and liabilities may require valuation adjustments that a
market participant would require to arrive at fair value for factors, such as
counterparty and the firm’s credit quality, funding risk, transfer
restrictions, liquidity and bid/offer spreads. Valuation adjustments are
generally based on market evidence.

The valuation techniques and nature of significant inputs used to determine
the fair value of the firm’s financial instruments are described below. See
Notes 5 through 10 for further information about significant unobservable
inputs used to value level 3 financial instruments.

Valuation Techniques and Significant Inputs for Trading Cash Instruments,
Investments and Loans

Level 1.

Level 1 instruments include U.S. government obligations, most

non-U.S.

government obligations, certain agency obligations, certain corporate debt
instruments, certain money market instruments and actively traded listed
equities. These instruments are valued using quoted prices for identical
unrestricted instruments in active markets. The firm defines active markets
for equity instruments based on the average daily trading volume both in
absolute terms and relative to the market capitalization for the instrument.
The firm defines active markets for debt instruments based on both the average
daily trading volume and the number of days with trading activity.

Level 2.

Level 2 instruments include certain

non-U.S.

government obligations, most agency obligations, most mortgage-backed loans
and securities, most corporate debt instruments, most state and municipal
obligations, most money market instruments, most other debt obligations,
restricted or less liquid listed equities, certain private equities,
commodities and certain lending commitments.

Valuations of level 2 instruments can be verified to quoted prices, recent
trading activity for identical or similar instruments, broker or dealer
quotations or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency. Consideration is given to the nature of the quotations (e.g.,
indicative or executable) and the relationship of recent market activity to
the prices provided from alternative pricing sources.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Valuation adjustments are typically made to level 2 instruments (i) if the
instrument is subject to transfer restrictions and/or (ii) for other premiums
and liquidity discounts that a market participant would require to arrive at
fair value. Valuation adjustments are generally based on market evidence.

Level 3.

Level 3 instruments have one or more significant valuation inputs that are not
observable. Absent evidence to the contrary, level 3 instruments are initially
valued at transaction price, which is considered to be the best initial
estimate of fair value. Subsequently, the firm uses other methodologies to
determine fair value, which vary based on the type of instrument. Valuation
inputs and assumptions are changed when corroborated by substantive observable
evidence, including values realized on sales.

Valuation techniques of level 3 instruments vary by instrument, but are
generally based on discounted cash flow techniques. The valuation techniques
and the nature of significant inputs used to determine the fair values of each
type of level 3 instrument are described below:

Loans and Securities Backed by Commercial Real Estate

Loans and securities backed by commercial real estate are directly or
indirectly collateralized by a single property or a portfolio of properties
and may include tranches of varying levels of subordination. Significant
inputs are generally determined based on relative value analyses and include:

Market yields implied by transactions of similar or related assets and/or
current levels and changes in market indices, such as the CMBX (an index that
tracks the performance of commercial mortgage bonds);  

Transaction prices in both the underlying collateral and instruments with the
same or similar underlying collateral;  

A measure of expected future cash flows in a default scenario (recovery rates)
implied by the value of the underlying collateral, which is mainly driven by
current performance of the underlying collateral and capitalization rates.
Recovery rates are expressed as a percentage of notional or face value of the
instrument and reflect the benefit of credit enhancements on certain
instruments; and  

Timing of expected future cash flows (duration) which, in certain cases, may
incorporate the impact of any loan forbearances and other unobservable inputs
(e.g., prepayment speeds).  

Loans and Securities Backed by Residential Real Estate

Loans and securities backed by residential real estate are directly or
indirectly collateralized by portfolios of residential real estate and may
include tranches of varying levels of subordination. Significant inputs are
generally determined based on relative value analyses, which incorporate
comparisons to instruments with similar collateral and risk profiles.
Significant inputs include:

Market yields implied by transactions of similar or related assets;  

Transaction prices in both the underlying collateral and instruments with the
same or similar underlying collateral;  

Cumulative loss expectations, driven by default rates, home price projections,
residential property liquidation timelines, related costs and subsequent
recoveries; and  

Duration, driven by underlying loan prepayment speeds and residential property
liquidation timelines.  

Corporate Debt Instruments

Corporate debt instruments includes corporate loans, debt securities and
convertible debentures. Significant inputs for corporate debt instruments are
generally determined based on relative value analyses, which incorporate
comparisons both to prices of credit default swaps that reference the same or
similar underlying instrument or entity and to other debt instruments for the
same or similar issuer for which observable prices or broker quotations are
available. Significant inputs include:

Market yields implied by transactions of similar or related assets and/or
current levels and trends of market indices, such as the CDX (an index that
tracks the performance of corporate credit);  

Current performance and recovery assumptions and, where the firm uses credit
default swaps to value the related instrument, the cost of borrowing the
underlying reference obligation;  

Duration; and  

Market and transaction multiples for corporate debt instruments with
convertibility or participation options.  

Equity Securities

Equity securities consists of private equities. Recent third-party completed
or pending transactions (e.g., merger proposals, debt restructurings, tender
offers) are considered the best evidence for any change in fair value. When
these are not available, the following valuation methodologies are used, as
appropriate:

Industry multiples (primarily EBITDA and revenue multiples) and public
comparables;  

Transactions in similar instruments;  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Discounted cash flow techniques; and  

Third-party appraisals.  

The firm also considers changes in the outlook for the relevant industry and
financial performance of the issuer as compared to projected performance.
Significant inputs include:

Market and transaction multiples;  

Discount rates and capitalization rates; and  

For equity securities with debt-like features, market yields implied by
transactions of similar or related assets, current performance and recovery
assumptions, and duration.  

Other Trading Cash Instruments, Investments and Loans

The significant inputs to the valuation of other instruments, such as

non-U.S.

government obligations and U.S. and

non-U.S.

agency obligations, state and municipal obligations, and other loans and debt
obligations are generally determined based on relative value analyses, which
incorporate comparisons both to prices of credit default swaps that reference
the same or similar underlying instrument or entity and to other debt
instruments for the same issuer for which observable prices or broker
quotations are available. Significant inputs include:

Market yields implied by transactions of similar or related assets and/or
current levels and trends of market indices;  

Current performance and recovery assumptions and, where the firm uses credit
default swaps to value the related instrument, the cost of borrowing the
underlying reference obligation; and  

Duration.  

Valuation Techniques and Significant Inputs for Derivatives

The firm’s level 2 and level 3 derivatives are valued using derivative pricing
models (e.g., discounted cash flow models, correlation models and models that
incorporate option pricing methodologies, such as Monte Carlo simulations).
Price transparency of derivatives can generally be characterized by product
type, as described below.

Interest Rate.

In general, the key inputs used to value interest rate derivatives are
transparent, even for most long-dated contracts. Interest rate swaps and
options denominated in the currencies of leading industrialized nations are
characterized by high trading volumes and tight bid/offer spreads. Interest
rate derivatives that reference indices, such as an inflation index, or the
shape of the yield curve (e.g.,

10-year

swap rate vs.

2-year

swap rate) are more complex, but the key inputs are generally observable.  

Credit.

Price transparency for credit default swaps, including both single names and
baskets of credits, varies by market and underlying reference entity or
obligation. Credit default swaps that reference indices, large corporates and
major sovereigns generally exhibit the most price transparency. For credit
default swaps with other underliers, price transparency varies based on credit
rating, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligations, and the
availability of the underlying reference obligations for delivery upon the
default of the issuer. Credit default swaps that reference loans, asset-backed
securities and emerging market debt instruments tend to have less price
transparency than those that reference corporate bonds. In addition, more
complex credit derivatives, such as those sensitive to the correlation between
two or more underlying reference obligations, generally have less price
transparency.  

Currency.

Prices for currency derivatives based on the exchange rates of leading
industrialized nations, including those with longer tenors, are generally
transparent. The primary difference between the price transparency of
developed and emerging market currency derivatives is that emerging markets
tend to be only observable for contracts with shorter tenors.  

Commodity.

Commodity derivatives include transactions referenced to energy (e.g., oil,
natural gas and electricity), metals (e.g., precious and base) and soft
commodities (e.g., agricultural). Price transparency varies based on the
underlying commodity, delivery location, tenor and product quality (e.g.,
diesel fuel compared to unleaded gasoline). In general, price transparency for
commodity derivatives is greater for contracts with shorter tenors and
contracts that are more closely aligned with major and/or benchmark commodity
indices.  

Equity.

Price transparency for equity derivatives varies by market and underlier.
Options on indices and the common stock of corporates included in major equity
indices exhibit the most price transparency. Equity derivatives generally have
observable market prices, except for contracts with long tenors or reference
prices that differ significantly from current market prices. More complex
equity derivatives, such as those sensitive to the correlation between two or
more individual stocks, generally have less price transparency.  

Liquidity is essential to observability of all product types. If transaction
volumes decline, previously transparent prices and other inputs may become
unobservable. Conversely, even highly structured products may at times have
trading volumes large enough to provide observability of prices and other
inputs.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Level 1.

Level 1 derivatives include short-term contracts for future delivery of
securities when the underlying security is a level 1 instrument, and exchange-
traded derivatives if they are actively traded and are valued at their quoted
market price.

Level 2.

Level 2 derivatives include OTC derivatives for which all significant
valuation inputs are corroborated by market evidence and exchange-traded
derivatives that are not actively traded and/or that are valued using models
that calibrate to market-clearing levels of OTC derivatives.

The selection of a particular model to value a derivative depends on the
contractual terms of and specific risks inherent in the instrument, as well as
the availability of pricing information in the market. For derivatives that
trade in liquid markets, model selection does not involve significant
management judgment because outputs of models can be calibrated to market-
clearing levels.

Valuation models require a variety of inputs, such as contractual terms,
market prices, yield curves, discount rates (including those derived from
interest rates on collateral received and posted as specified in credit
support agreements for collateralized derivatives), credit curves, measures of
volatility, prepayment rates, loss severity rates and correlations of such
inputs. Significant inputs to the valuations of level 2 derivatives can be
verified to market transactions, broker or dealer quotations or other
alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
Consideration is given to the nature of the quotations (e.g., indicative or
executable) and the relationship of recent market activity to the prices
provided from alternative pricing sources.

Level 3.

Level 3 derivatives are valued using models which utilize observable level 1
and/or level 2 inputs, as well as unobservable level 3 inputs. The significant
unobservable inputs used to value the firm’s level 3 derivatives are described
below.

For level 3 interest rate and currency derivatives, significant unobservable
inputs include correlations of certain currencies and interest rates (e.g.,
the correlation between Euro inflation and Euro interest rates) and specific
interest rate and currency volatilities.  

For level 3 credit derivatives, significant unobservable inputs include
illiquid credit spreads and upfront credit points, which are unique to
specific reference obligations and reference entities, and recovery rates.  

For level 3 commodity derivatives, significant unobservable inputs include
volatilities for options with strike prices that differ significantly from
current market prices and prices or spreads for certain products for which the
product quality or physical location of the commodity is not aligned with
benchmark indices.  

For level 3 equity derivatives, significant unobservable inputs generally
include equity volatility inputs for options that are long-dated and/or have
strike prices that differ significantly from current market prices. In
addition, the valuation of certain structured trades requires the use of level
3 correlation inputs, such as the correlation of the price performance of two
or more individual stocks or the correlation of the price performance for a
basket of stocks to another asset class, such as commodities.  

Subsequent to the initial valuation of a level 3 derivative, the firm updates
the level 1 and level 2 inputs to reflect observable market changes and any
resulting gains and losses are classified in level 3. Level 3 inputs are
changed when corroborated by evidence, such as similar market transactions,
third-party pricing services and/or broker or dealer quotations or other
empirical market data. In circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model
value by reference to market transactions, it is possible that a different
valuation model could produce a materially different estimate of fair value.
See Note 7 for further information about significant unobservable inputs used
in the valuation of level 3 derivatives.

Valuation Adjustments.

Valuation adjustments are integral to determining the fair value of derivative
portfolios and are used to adjust the

mid-market

valuations produced by derivative pricing models to the exit price valuation.
These adjustments incorporate bid/offer spreads, the cost of liquidity, and
credit and funding valuation adjustments, which account for the credit and
funding risk inherent in the uncollateralized portion of derivative
portfolios. The firm also makes funding valuation adjustments to
collateralized derivatives where the terms of the agreement do not permit the
firm to deliver or repledge collateral received. Market-based inputs are
generally used when calibrating valuation adjustments to market-clearing
levels.

In addition, for derivatives that include significant unobservable inputs, the
firm makes model or exit price adjustments to account for the valuation
uncertainty present in the transaction.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Valuation Techniques and Significant Inputs for Other Financial Instruments at
Fair Value

In addition to trading cash instruments, derivatives, and certain investments
and loans, the firm accounts for certain of its other financial assets and
liabilities at fair value under the fair value option. Such instruments
include resale and repurchase agreements; certain securities borrowed and
loaned transactions; certain customer and other receivables, including certain
margin loans; certain time deposits, including structured certificates of
deposit, which are hybrid financial instruments; substantially all other
secured financings, including transfers of assets accounted for as financings;
certain unsecured short- and long-term borrowings, substantially all of which
are hybrid financial instruments; and certain other liabilities. These
instruments are generally valued based on discounted cash flow techniques,
which incorporate inputs with reasonable levels of price transparency, and are
generally classified in level 2 because the inputs are observable. Valuation
adjustments may be made for liquidity and for counterparty and the firm’s
credit quality. The significant inputs used to value the firm’s other
financial instruments are described below.

Resale and Repurchase Agreements and Securities Borrowed and Loaned.

The significant inputs to the valuation of resale and repurchase agreements
and securities borrowed and loaned are funding spreads, the amount and timing
of expected future cash flows and interest rates.

Customer and Other Receivables.

The significant inputs to the valuation of receivables are interest rates, the
amount and timing of expected future cash flows and funding spreads.

Deposits.

The significant inputs to the valuation of time deposits are interest rates
and the amount and timing of future cash flows. The inputs used to value the
embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments are consistent
with the inputs used to value the firm’s other derivative instruments
described above. See Note 7 for further information about derivatives and Note
13 for further information about deposits.

Other Secured Financings.

The significant inputs to the valuation of other secured financings are the
amount and timing of expected future cash flows, interest rates, funding
spreads and the fair value of the collateral delivered by the firm (determined
using the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, market prices,
market yields and recovery assumptions). See Note 11 for further information
about other secured financings.

Unsecured Short- and Long-Term Borrowings.

The significant inputs to the valuation of unsecured short- and long-term
borrowings are the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, interest
rates, the credit spreads of the firm and commodity prices for prepaid
commodity transactions. The inputs used to value the embedded derivative
component of hybrid financial instruments are consistent with the inputs used
to value the firm’s other derivative instruments described above. See Note 7
for further information about derivatives and Note 14 for further information
about borrowings.

Other Liabilities.

The significant inputs to the valuation of other liabilities are the amount
and timing of expected future cash flows and equity volatility and correlation
inputs. The inputs used to value the embedded derivative component of hybrid
financial instruments are consistent with the inputs used to value the firm’s
other derivative instruments described above. See Note 7 for further
information about derivatives.

Financial Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value

The table below presents financial assets and liabilities carried at fair
value.

In the table above:

Counterparty netting among positions classified in the same level is included
in that level.  

Counterparty and cash collateral netting represents the impact on derivatives
of netting across levels.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents a summary of level 3 financial assets.

Level 3 financial assets as of December 2021 decreased compared with December
2020, primarily reflecting a decrease in level 3 investments. See Notes 5
through 10 for further information about level 3 financial assets (including
information about unrealized gains and losses related to level 3 financial
assets and transfers in and out of level 3).

Note 5.

Trading Assets and Liabilities

Trading assets and liabilities include trading cash instruments and
derivatives held in connection with the firm’s market-making or risk
management activities. These assets and liabilities are carried at fair value
either under the fair value option or in accordance with other U.S. GAAP, and
the related fair value gains and losses are generally recognized in the
consolidated statements of earnings.

The table below presents a summary of trading assets and liabilities.

See Note 6 for further information about trading cash instruments and Note 7
for further information about derivatives.

Gains and Losses from Market Making

The table below presents market making revenues by major product type.

In the table above:

Gains/(losses) include both realized and unrealized gains and losses.
Gains/(losses) exclude related interest income and interest expense. See Note
23 for further information about interest income and interest expense.  

Gains/(losses) included in market making are primarily related to the firm’s
trading assets and liabilities, including both derivative and

non-derivative

financial instruments.  

Gains/(losses) are not representative of the manner in which the firm manages
its business activities because many of the firm’s market-making and client
facilitation strategies utilize financial instruments across various product
types. Accordingly, gains or losses in one product type frequently offset
gains or losses in other product types. For example, most of the firm’s
longer-term derivatives across product types are sensitive to changes in
interest rates and may be economically hedged with interest rate swaps.
Similarly, a significant portion of the firm’s trading cash instruments and
derivatives across product types has exposure to foreign currencies and may be
economically hedged with foreign currency contracts.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 6.

Trading Cash Instruments

Trading cash instruments consists of instruments held in connection with the
firm’s market-making or risk management activities. These instruments are
carried at fair value and the related fair value gains and losses are
recognized in the consolidated statements of earnings.

Fair Value of Trading Cash Instruments by Level

The table below presents trading cash instruments by level within the fair
value hierarchy.

In the table above:

Trading cash instrument assets are shown as positive amounts and trading cash
instrument liabilities are shown as negative amounts.  

Corporate debt instruments includes corporate loans, debt securities,
convertible debentures, prepaid commodity transactions and transfers of assets
accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases.  

Other debt obligations includes other asset-backed securities and money market
instruments.  

Equity securities includes public equities and exchange-traded funds.  

See Note 4 for an overview of the firm’s fair value measurement policies and
the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine the fair
value of trading cash instruments. See Note 7 for information about hedging
activities for precious metals included in commodities and accounted for at
the lower of cost or net realizable value. These precious metals are
designated in a fair value hedging relationship, and therefore their carrying
value equals fair value.

Significant Unobservable Inputs

The table below presents the amount of level 3 assets, and ranges and weighted
averages of significant unobservable inputs used to value level 3 trading cash
instruments.

As of both December 2021 and December 2020, level 3 government and agency
obligations, state and municipal obligations, other debt obligations and
commodities were not material, and, therefore, are not included in the table
above. In addition, as of both December 2021 and December 2020, each of the
significant unobservable inputs for equity securities did not have a range as
they pertained to individual positions. Therefore, such unobservable inputs
are not included in the table above.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above:

Ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the
valuation of each type of trading cash instrument.  

Weighted averages are calculated by weighting each input by the relative fair
value of the trading cash instruments.  

The ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the
appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one trading
cash instrument. For example, the highest recovery rate for corporate debt
instruments is appropriate for valuing a specific corporate debt instrument,
but may not be appropriate for valuing any other corporate debt instrument.
Accordingly, the ranges of inputs do not represent uncertainty in, or possible
ranges of, fair value measurements of level 3 trading cash instruments.  

Increases in yield, duration or cumulative loss rate used in the valuation of
level 3 trading cash instruments would have resulted in a lower fair value
measurement, while increases in recovery rate would have resulted in a higher
fair value measurement as of both December 2021 and December 2020. Due to the
distinctive nature of each level 3 trading cash instrument, the
interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform within each product
type.  

Trading cash instruments are valued using discounted cash flows.  

Level 3 Rollforward

The table below presents a summary of the changes in fair value for level 3
trading cash instruments.

In the table above:

Changes in fair value are presented for all trading cash instruments that are
classified in level 3 as of the end of the period.  

Net unrealized gains/(losses) relates to trading cash instruments that were
still held at

period-end.  

Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the
beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. If a trading cash
instrument was transferred to level 3 during a reporting period, its entire
gain or loss for the period is classified in level 3.  

For level 3 trading cash instrument assets, increases are shown as positive
amounts, while decreases are shown as negative amounts. For level 3 trading
cash instrument liabilities, increases are shown as negative amounts, while
decreases are shown as positive amounts.  

Level 3 trading cash instruments are frequently economically hedged with level
1 and level 2 trading cash instruments and/or level 1, level 2 or level 3
derivatives. Accordingly, gains or losses that are classified in level 3 can
be partially offset by gains or losses attributable to level 1 or level 2
trading cash instruments and/or level 1, level 2 or level 3 derivatives. As a
result, gains or losses included in the level 3 rollforward below do not
necessarily represent the overall impact on the firm’s results of operations,
liquidity or capital resources.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents information, by product type, for assets included in
the summary table above.

In the table above, other includes U.S. and

non-U.S.

government and agency obligations, other debt obligations and equity
securities.

Level 3 Rollforward Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 trading cash instrument
assets of $132 million (reflecting $80 million of net realized gains and $52
million of net unrealized gains) for 2021 included gains of $45 million
reported in market making and $87 million reported in interest income.

The drivers of the net unrealized gains on level 3 trading cash instrument
assets for 2021 were not material.

Transfers into level 3 trading cash instrument assets during 2021 primarily
reflected transfers of certain corporate debt instruments from level 2
(principally due to certain unobservable yield and duration inputs becoming
significant to the valuation of these instruments, and reduced price
transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence, including fewer market
transactions in these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 trading cash instrument assets during 2021 primarily
reflected transfers of certain corporate debt instruments, and loans and
securities backed by commercial real estate to level 2 (in each case,
principally due to increased price transparency as a result of market
evidence, including market transactions in these instruments, and certain
unobservable yield and duration inputs no longer being significant to the
valuation of these instruments).

Year Ended December 2020.

The net realized and unrealized losses on level 3 trading cash instrument
assets of $77 million (reflecting $66 million of net realized gains and $143
million of net unrealized losses) for 2020 included gains/(losses) of $(193)
million reported in market making and $116 million reported in interest
income.

The net unrealized losses on level 3 trading cash instrument assets for 2020
primarily reflected losses on certain corporate debt instruments (principally
driven by wider credit spreads).

Transfers into level 3 trading cash instrument assets during 2020 primarily
reflected transfers of certain corporate debt instruments from level 2
(principally due to reduced price transparency as a result of a lack of market
evidence, including fewer market transactions in these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 trading cash instrument assets during 2020 primarily
reflected transfers of certain corporate debt instruments, and loans and
securities backed by residential real estate to level 2 (in each case,
principally due to increased price transparency as a result of market
evidence, including market transactions in these instruments).

Note 7.

Derivatives and Hedging Activities

Derivative Activities

Derivatives are instruments that derive their value from underlying asset
prices, indices, reference rates and other inputs, or a combination of these
factors. Derivatives may be traded on an exchange (exchange-traded) or they
may be privately negotiated contracts, which are usually referred to as OTC
derivatives. Certain of the firm’s OTC derivatives are cleared and settled
through central clearing counterparties

(OTC-cleared),

while others are bilateral contracts between two counterparties (bilateral
OTC).

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Market Making.

As a market maker, the firm enters into derivative transactions to provide
liquidity to clients and to facilitate the transfer and hedging of their
risks. In this role, the firm typically acts as principal and is required to
commit capital to provide execution, and maintains market-making positions in
response to, or in anticipation of, client demand.

Risk Management.

The firm also enters into derivatives to actively manage risk exposures that
arise from its market-making and investing and financing activities. The
firm’s holdings and exposures are hedged, in many cases, on either a portfolio
or risk-specific basis, as opposed to an instrument-by-instrument basis. The
offsetting impact of this economic hedging is reflected in the same business
segment as the related revenues. In addition, the firm may enter into
derivatives designated as hedges under U.S. GAAP. These derivatives are used
to manage interest rate exposure of certain fixed-rate unsecured borrowings
and deposits, foreign exchange risk of certain available-for-sale securities
and the net investment in certain

non-U.S.

operations, and the price risk of certain commodities.

The firm enters into various types of derivatives, including:

Futures and Forwards.

Contracts that commit counterparties to purchase or sell financial
instruments, commodities or currencies in the future.  

Swaps.

Contracts that require counterparties to exchange cash flows, such as currency
or interest payment streams. The amounts exchanged are based on the specific
terms of the contract with reference to specified rates, financial
instruments, commodities, currencies or indices.  

Options.

Contracts in which the option purchaser has the right, but not the obligation,
to purchase from or sell to the option writer financial instruments,
commodities or currencies within a defined time period for a specified price.  

Derivatives are reported on a

net-by-counterparty

basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for derivative assets and
liabilities for a given counterparty) when a legal right of setoff exists
under an enforceable netting agreement (counterparty netting). Derivatives are
accounted for at fair value, net of cash collateral received or posted under
enforceable credit support agreements (cash collateral netting). Derivative
assets are included in trading assets and derivative liabilities are included
in trading liabilities. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on
derivatives not designated as hedges are included in market making (for
derivatives included in the Global Markets segment), and other principal
transactions (for derivatives included in the remaining business segments) in
the consolidated statements of earnings. For both 2021 and 2020, substantially
all of the firm’s derivatives were included in the Global Markets segment.

The tables below present the gross fair value and the notional amounts of
derivative contracts by major product type, the amounts of counterparty and
cash collateral netting in the consolidated balance sheets, as well as cash
and securities collateral posted and received under enforceable credit support

agreements

that do not

meet

the criteria for netting under U.S. GAAP.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to

Consolidated

Financial

Statements

In the tables above:

Gross fair values exclude the effects of both counterparty netting and
collateral, and therefore are not representative of the firm’s exposure.  

Where the firm has received or posted collateral under credit support
agreements, but has not yet determined such agreements are enforceable, the
related collateral has not been netted.  

Notional amounts, which represent the sum of gross long and short derivative
contracts, provide an indication of the volume of the firm’s derivative
activity and do not represent anticipated losses.  

Total gross fair value of derivatives included derivative assets of $17.48
billion as of December 2021 and $20.60 billion as of December 2020, and
derivative liabilities of $17.29 billion as of December 2021 and $22.98
billion as of

December

2020, which are not subject to an enforceable netting agreement or are subject
to a netting agreement that the firm has not yet determined to be enforceable.  

Fair Value of Derivatives by Level

The table below presents derivatives on a gross basis by level and product
type, as well as the impact of netting.

In the table above:

Gross fair values exclude the effects of both counterparty netting and
collateral netting, and therefore are not representative of the firm’s
exposure.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Counterparty netting is reflected in each level to the extent that receivable
and payable balances are netted within the same level and is included in
counterparty netting in levels. Where the counterparty netting is across
levels, the netting is included in cross-level counterparty netting.  

Derivative assets are shown as positive amounts and derivative liabilities are
shown as negative amounts.  

See Note 4 for an overview of the firm’s fair value measurement policies and
the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine the fair
value of derivatives.

Significant Unobservable Inputs

The table below presents the amount of level 3 derivative assets
(liabilities), and ranges, averages and medians of significant unobservable
inputs used to value level 3 derivatives.

In the table above:

Derivative assets are shown as positive amounts and derivative liabilities are
shown as negative amounts.  

Ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the
valuation of each type of derivative.  

Averages represent the arithmetic average of the inputs and are not weighted
by the relative fair value or notional amount of the respective financial
instruments. An average greater than the median indicates that the majority of
inputs are below the average. For example, the difference between the average
and the median for credit spreads indicates that the majority of the inputs
fall in the lower end of the range.  

The ranges, averages and medians of these inputs are not representative of the
appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one
derivative. For example, the highest correlation for interest rate derivatives
is appropriate for valuing a specific interest rate derivative but may not be
appropriate for valuing any other interest rate derivative. Accordingly, the
ranges of inputs do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair
value measurements of level 3 derivatives.  

Interest rates, currencies and equities derivatives are valued using option
pricing models, credit derivatives are valued using option pricing,
correlation and discounted cash flow models, and commodities derivatives are
valued using option pricing and discounted cash flow models.  

The fair value of any one instrument may be determined using multiple
valuation techniques. For example, option pricing models and discounted cash
flow models are typically used together to determine fair value. Therefore,
the level 3 balance encompasses both of these techniques.  

Correlation within currencies and equities includes cross-product type
correlation.  

Natural gas spread represents the spread per million British thermal units of
natural gas.  

Oil spread represents the spread per barrel of oil and refined products.  

Electricity price represents the price per megawatt hour of electricity.  

Range of Significant Unobservable Inputs

The following provides information about the ranges of significant
unobservable inputs used to value the firm’s level 3 derivative instruments:

Correlation.

Ranges for correlation cover a variety of underliers both within one product
type (e.g., equity index and equity single stock names) and across product
types (e.g., correlation of an interest rate and a currency), as well as
across regions. Generally, cross-product type correlation inputs are used to
value more complex instruments and are lower than correlation inputs on assets
within the same derivative product type.  

Volatility.

Ranges for volatility cover numerous underliers across a variety of markets,
maturities and strike prices. For example, volatility of equity indices is
generally lower than volatility of single stocks.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Credit spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates.

The ranges for credit spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates cover
a variety of underliers (index and single names), regions, sectors, maturities
and credit qualities (high-yield and investment-grade). The broad range of
this population gives rise to the width of the ranges of significant
unobservable inputs.  

Commodity prices and spreads.

The ranges for commodity prices and spreads cover variability in products,
maturities and delivery locations.  

Sensitivity of Fair Value Measurement to Changes in Significant Unobservable
Inputs

The following is a description of the directional sensitivity of the firm’s
level 3 fair value measurements to changes in significant unobservable inputs,
in isolation, as of each

period-end:

Correlation.

In general, for contracts where the holder benefits from the convergence of
the underlying asset or index prices (e.g., interest rates, credit spreads,
foreign exchange rates, inflation rates and equity prices), an increase in
correlation results in a higher fair value measurement.  

Volatility.

In general, for purchased options, an increase in volatility results in a
higher fair value measurement.  

Credit spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates.

In general, the fair value of purchased credit protection increases as credit
spreads or upfront credit points increase or recovery rates decrease. Credit
spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates are strongly related to
distinctive risk factors of the underlying reference obligations, which
include reference entity-specific factors, such as leverage, volatility and
industry, market-based risk factors, such as borrowing costs or liquidity of
the underlying reference obligation, and macroeconomic conditions.  

Commodity prices and spreads.

In general, for contracts where the holder is receiving a commodity, an
increase in the spread (price difference from a benchmark index due to
differences in quality or delivery location) or price results in a higher fair
value measurement.  

Due to the distinctive nature of each of the firm’s level 3 derivatives, the
interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform within each product
type.

Level 3 Rollforward

The table below presents a summary of the changes in fair value for level 3
derivatives.

In the table above:

Changes in fair value are presented for all derivative assets and liabilities
that are classified in level 3 as of the end of the period.  

Net unrealized gains/(losses) relates to instruments that were still held at

period-end.  

Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the
beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. If a derivative was
transferred into level 3 during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss
for the period is classified in level 3.  

Positive amounts for transfers into level 3 and negative amounts for transfers
out of level 3 represent net transfers of derivative assets. Negative amounts
for transfers into level 3 and positive amounts for transfers out of level 3
represent net transfers of derivative liabilities.  

A derivative with level 1 and/or level 2 inputs is classified in level 3 in
its entirety if it has at least one significant level 3 input.  

If there is one significant level 3 input, the entire gain or loss from
adjusting only observable inputs (i.e., level 1 and level 2 inputs) is
classified in level 3.  

Gains or losses that have been classified in level 3 resulting from changes in
level 1 or level 2 inputs are frequently offset by gains or losses
attributable to level 1 or level 2 derivatives and/or level 1, level 2 and
level 3 trading cash instruments. As a result, gains/(losses) included in the
level 3 rollforward below do not necessarily represent the overall impact on
the firm’s results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents information, by product type, for derivatives
included in the summary table above.

Level 3 Rollforward Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 derivatives of $717 million
(reflecting $265 million of net realized gains and $452 million of net
unrealized gains) for 2021 included gains of $700 million reported in market
making and gains of $17 million reported in other principal transactions.

The net unrealized gains on level 3 derivatives for 2021 were primarily
attributable to gains on certain credit and currency derivatives (in each
case, primarily reflecting the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates),
gains on certain commodity derivatives (primarily reflecting the impact of an
increase in commodity prices) and gains on certain interest rate derivatives
(primarily reflecting the impact of an increase in interest rates), partially
offset by losses on certain equity derivatives (primarily reflecting the
impact of an increase in equity prices).

The drivers of transfers into level 3 derivatives during 2021 were not
material.

Transfers out of level 3 derivatives during 2021 primarily reflected transfers
of certain interest rate derivative assets to level 2 (principally due to
increased transparency of certain volatility inputs used to value these
derivatives).

Year Ended December 2020.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 derivatives of $838 million
(reflecting $226 million of net realized gains and $612 million of net
unrealized gains) for 2020 included gains of $900 million reported in market
making and losses of $62 million reported in other principal transactions.

The net unrealized gains on level 3 derivatives for 2020 were primarily
attributable to gains on certain equity derivatives (primarily reflecting the
impact of an increase in equity prices), gains on certain interest rate
derivatives (primarily reflecting the impact of a decrease in interest rates
and changes in foreign exchange rates), gains on certain commodity derivatives
(primarily reflecting the impact of changes in commodity prices), and gains on
certain credit derivatives (primarily reflecting the impact of a decrease in
interest rates), partially offset by losses on certain currency derivatives
(primarily reflecting the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates and a
decrease in interest rates).

The drivers of both transfers into level 3 derivatives and transfers out of
level 3 derivatives during 2020 were not material.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

OTC Derivatives

The table below presents OTC derivative assets and liabilities by tenor and
major product type.

In the table above:

Tenor is based on remaining contractual maturity.  

Counterparty netting within the same product type and tenor category is
included within such product type and tenor category.  

Counterparty netting across product types within the same tenor category is
included in counterparty netting in tenors. Where the counterparty netting is
across tenor categories, the netting is included in cross-tenor counterparty
netting.  

Credit Derivatives

The firm enters into a broad array of credit derivatives to facilitate client
transactions and to manage the credit risk associated with market-making and
investing and financing activities. Credit derivatives are actively managed
based on the firm’s net risk position. Credit derivatives are generally
individually negotiated contracts and can have various settlement and payment
conventions. Credit events include failure to pay, bankruptcy, acceleration of
indebtedness, restructuring, repudiation and dissolution of the reference
entity.

The firm enters into the following types of credit derivatives:

Credit Default Swaps.

Single-name credit default swaps protect the buyer against the loss of
principal on one or more bonds, loans or mortgages (reference obligations) in
the event the issuer of the reference obligations suffers a credit event. The
buyer of protection pays an initial or periodic premium to the seller and
receives protection for the period of the contract. If there is no credit
event, as defined in the contract, the seller of protection makes no payments
to the buyer. If a credit event occurs, the seller of protection is required
to make a payment to the buyer, calculated according to the terms of the
contract.  

Credit Options.

In a credit option, the option writer assumes the obligation to purchase or
sell a reference obligation at a specified price or credit spread. The option
purchaser buys the right, but does not assume the obligation, to sell the
reference obligation to, or purchase it from, the option writer. The payments
on credit options depend either on a particular credit spread or the price of
the reference obligation.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Credit Indices, Baskets and Tranches.

Credit derivatives may reference a basket of single-name credit default swaps
or a broad-based index. If a credit event occurs in one of the underlying
reference obligations, the protection seller pays the protection buyer. The
payment is typically a

pro-rata

portion of the transaction’s total notional amount based on the underlying
defaulted reference obligation. In certain transactions, the credit risk of a
basket or index is separated into various portions (tranches), each having
different levels of subordination. The most junior tranches cover initial
defaults and once losses exceed the notional amount of these junior tranches,
any excess loss is covered by the next most senior tranche.  

Total Return Swaps.

A total return swap transfers the risks relating to economic performance of a
reference obligation from the protection buyer to the protection seller.
Typically, the protection buyer receives a floating rate of interest and
protection against any reduction in fair value of the reference obligation,
and the protection seller receives the cash flows associated with the
reference obligation, plus any increase in the fair value of the reference
obligation.  

The firm economically hedges its exposure to written credit derivatives
primarily by entering into offsetting purchased credit derivatives with
identical underliers. Substantially all of the firm’s purchased credit
derivative transactions are with financial institutions and are subject to
stringent collateral thresholds. In addition, upon the occurrence of a
specified trigger event, the firm may take possession of the reference
obligations underlying a particular written credit derivative, and
consequently may, upon liquidation of the reference obligations, recover
amounts on the underlying reference obligations in the event of default.

As of December 2021, written credit derivatives had a total gross notional
amount of $510.24 billion and purchased credit derivatives had a total gross
notional amount of $569.34 billion, for total net notional purchased
protection of $59.10 billion. As of December 2020, written credit derivatives
had a total gross notional amount of $515.85 billion and purchased credit
derivatives had a total gross notional amount of $558.18 billion, for total
net notional purchased protection of $42.33 billion. The firm’s written and
purchased credit derivatives primarily consist of credit default swaps.

The table below presents information about credit derivatives.

In the table above:

Fair values exclude the effects of both netting of receivable balances with
payable balances under enforceable netting agreements, and netting of cash
received or posted under enforceable credit support agreements, and therefore
are not representative of the firm’s credit exposure.  

Tenor is based on remaining contractual maturity.  

The credit spread on the underlier, together with the tenor of the contract,
are indicators of payment/performance risk. The firm is less likely to pay or
otherwise be required to perform where the credit spread and the tenor are
lower.  

Offsetting purchased credit derivatives represent the notional amount of
purchased credit derivatives that economically hedge written credit
derivatives with identical underliers.  

Other purchased credit derivatives represent the notional amount of all other
purchased credit derivatives not included in offsetting.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Impact of Credit and Funding Spreads on Derivatives

The firm realizes gains or losses on its derivative contracts. These gains or
losses include credit valuation adjustments (CVA) relating to uncollateralized
derivative assets and liabilities, which represent the gains or losses
(including hedges) attributable to the impact of changes in credit exposure,
counterparty credit spreads, liability funding spreads (which include the
firm’s own credit), probability of default and assumed recovery. These gains
or losses also include funding valuation adjustments (FVA) relating to
uncollateralized derivative assets, which represent the gains or losses
(including hedges) attributable to the impact of changes in expected funding
exposures and funding spreads.

The table below presents information about CVA and FVA.

Bifurcated Embedded Derivatives

The table below presents the fair value and the notional amount of derivatives
that have been bifurcated from their related borrowings.

In the table above, derivatives that have been bifurcated from their related
borrowings are recorded at fair value and primarily consist of interest rate,
equity and commodity products. These derivatives are included in unsecured
short- and long-term borrowings, as well as other secured financings, with the
related borrowings.

Derivatives with Credit-Related Contingent Features

Certain of the firm’s derivatives have been transacted under bilateral
agreements with counterparties who may require the firm to post collateral or
terminate the transactions based on changes in the firm’s credit ratings. The
firm assesses the impact of these bilateral agreements by determining the
collateral or termination payments that would occur assuming a downgrade by
all rating agencies. A downgrade by any one rating agency, depending on the
agency’s relative ratings of the firm at the time of the downgrade, may have
an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all rating
agencies.

The table below presents information about net derivative liabilities under
bilateral agreements (excluding collateral posted), the fair value of
collateral posted and additional collateral or termination payments that could
have been called by counterparties in the event of a

one-

or

two-notch

downgrade in the firm’s credit ratings.

Hedge Accounting

The firm applies hedge accounting for (i) interest rate swaps used to manage
the interest rate exposure of certain fixed-rate unsecured long- and short-
term borrowings and certain fixed-rate certificates of deposit, (ii) foreign
exchange forward contracts used to manage the foreign exchange risk of certain

available-for-sale

securities, (iii) foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency-
denominated debt used to manage foreign currency exposures on the firm’s net
investment in certain

non-U.S.

operations and (iv) commodity futures contracts used to manage the price risk
of certain commodities.

To qualify for hedge accounting, the hedging instrument must be highly
effective at reducing the risk from the exposure being hedged. Additionally,
the firm must formally document the hedging relationship at inception and
assess the hedging relationship at least on a quarterly basis to ensure the
hedging instrument continues to be highly effective over the life of the
hedging relationship.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Fair Value Hedges

The firm designates interest rate swaps as fair value hedges of certain fixed-
rate unsecured long- and short-term debt and fixed-rate certificates of
deposit. These interest rate swaps hedge changes in fair value attributable to
the designated benchmark interest rate (e.g., London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR), Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) or Overnight Index Swap
Rate), effectively converting a substantial portion of fixed-rate obligations
into floating-rate obligations.

The firm applies a statistical method that utilizes regression analysis when
assessing the effectiveness of these hedging relationships in achieving
offsetting changes in the fair values of the hedging instrument and the risk
being hedged (i.e., interest rate risk). An interest rate swap is considered
highly effective in offsetting changes in fair value attributable to changes
in the hedged risk when the regression analysis results in a coefficient of
determination of 80% or greater and a slope between 80% and 125%.

For qualifying interest rate fair value hedges, gains or losses on derivatives
are included in interest expense. The change in fair value of the hedged item
attributable to the risk being hedged is reported as an adjustment to its
carrying value (hedging adjustment) and is also included in interest expense.
When a derivative is no longer designated as a hedge, any remaining difference
between the carrying value and par value of the hedged item is amortized in
interest expense over the remaining life of the hedged item using the
effective interest method. See Note 23 for further information about interest
income and interest expense.

The table below presents the gains/(losses) from interest rate derivatives
accounted for as hedges and the related hedged borrowings and deposits, and
total interest expense.

The table below presents the carrying value of deposits and unsecured
borrowings that are designated in a hedging relationship and the related
cumulative hedging adjustment (increase/(decrease)) from current and prior
hedging relationships included in such carrying values.

In the table above, cumulative hedging adjustment included $5.91 billion as of
December 2021 and $6.34 billion as of December 2020 of hedging adjustments
from prior hedging relationships that were

de-designated

and substantially all were related to unsecured long-term borrowings.

In addition,

cumulative hedging adjustments for items no longer designated in a hedging
relationship were $68 million as of December 2021 and $489 million as of
December 2020 and substantially all were related to unsecured long-term
borrowings.

The firm designates foreign exchange forward contracts as fair value hedges of
the foreign exchange risk of

non-U.S.

government securities classified as

available-for-sale.

See Note 8 for information about the amortized cost and fair value of such
securities. The effectiveness of such hedges is assessed based on changes in
spot rates. The gains/(losses) on the hedges (relating to both spot and
forward points) and the foreign exchange gains/(losses) on the related

available-for-sale

securities were included in market making and were not material for both 2021
and 2020.

During 2021, the firm designated commodity futures contracts as fair value
hedges of the price risk of certain precious metals included in commodities
within trading assets. As of December 2021, the carrying value of such
commodities was $1.05 billion and the amortized cost was $1.02 billion.
Changes in spot rates of such commodities are reflected as an adjustment to
their carrying value, and the related gains/(losses) on both the commodities
and the designated futures contracts are included in market making. The
contractual forward points on the designated futures contracts are amortized
into earnings ratably over the life of the contract and other gains/(losses)
as a result of changes in the forward points are included in other
comprehensive income/(loss). The cumulative hedging adjustment was not
material as of December 2021 and the related gains/(losses) were not material
for 2021.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Net Investment Hedges

The firm seeks to reduce the impact of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates
on its net investments in certain

non-U.S.

operations through the use of foreign currency forward contracts and foreign
currency-denominated debt. For foreign currency forward contracts designated
as hedges, the effectiveness of the hedge is assessed based on the overall
changes in the fair value of the forward contracts (i.e., based on changes in
forward rates). For foreign currency-denominated debt designated as a hedge,
the effectiveness of the hedge is assessed based on changes in spot rates. For
qualifying net investment hedges, all gains or losses on the hedging
instruments are included in currency translation.

The table below presents the gains/(losses) from net investment hedging.

Gains or losses on individual net investments in

non-U.S.

operations are reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
to other principal transactions in the consolidated statements of earnings
when such net investments are sold or substantially liquidated. The gross and
net gains and losses on hedges and the related net investments in

non-U.S.

operations reclassified to earnings from accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss) was not material for 2021, $61 million (reflecting a gain of
$214 million related to hedges and a loss of $153 million on the related net
investments in

non-U.S.

operations) for 2020 and not material for 2019.

The firm had designated $3.71 billion as of December 2021 and $4.97 billion as
of December 2020 of foreign currency-denominated debt, included in unsecured
long- and short-term borrowings, as hedges of net investments in

non-U.S.

subsidiaries.

Note 8.

Investments

Investments includes debt instruments and equity securities that are accounted
for at fair value and are generally held by the firm in connection with its
long-term investing activities. In addition, investments includes debt
securities classified as

available-for-sale

and

held-to-maturity

that are generally held in connection with the firm’s asset-liability
management activities. Investments also consists of equity securities that are
accounted for under the equity method.

The table below presents information about investments.

Equity Securities and Debt Instruments, at Fair Value

Equity securities and debt instruments, at fair value are accounted for at
fair value either under the fair value option or in accordance with other U.S.
GAAP, and the related fair value gains and losses are recognized in the
consolidated statements of earnings.

Equity Securities, at Fair Value.

Equity securities, at fair value consists of the firm’s public and private
equity investments in corporate and real estate entities.

The table below presents information about equity securities, at fair value.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above:

Equity securities, at fair value included investments accounted for at fair
value under the fair value option where the firm would otherwise apply the
equity method of accounting of $5.81 billion as of December 2021 and $7.14
billion as of December 2020. Gains recognized as a result of changes in the
fair value of equity securities for which the fair value option was elected
were $2.12 billion for 2021 and $573 million for 2020. These gains are
included in other principal transactions.  

Debt Instruments, at Fair Value.

Debt instruments, at fair value primarily includes mezzanine, senior and
distressed debt.

The table below presents information about debt instruments, at fair value.

In the table above:

Money market instruments primarily includes time deposits and investments in
money market funds.  

Investments in Funds at Net Asset Value Per Share.

Equity securities and debt instruments, at fair value include investments in
funds that are measured at NAV of the investment fund. The firm uses NAV to
measure the fair value of fund investments when (i) the fund investment does
not have a readily determinable fair value and (ii) the NAV of the investment
fund is calculated in a manner consistent with the measurement principles of
investment company accounting, including measurement of the investments at
fair value.

Substantially all of the firm’s investments in funds at NAV consist of
investments in firm-sponsored private equity, credit, real estate and hedge
funds where the firm

co-invests

with third-party investors.

Private equity funds primarily invest in a broad range of industries
worldwide, including leveraged buyouts, recapitalizations, growth investments
and distressed investments. Credit funds generally invest in loans and other
fixed income instruments and are focused on providing private high-yield
capital for leveraged and management buyout transactions, recapitalizations,
financings, refinancings, acquisitions and restructurings for private equity
firms, private family companies and corporate issuers. Real estate funds
invest globally, primarily in real estate companies, loan portfolios, debt
recapitalizations and property. Private equity, credit and real estate funds
are

closed-end

funds in which the firm’s investments are generally not eligible for
redemption. Distributions will be received from these funds as the underlying
assets are liquidated or distributed, the timing of which is uncertain.

The firm also invests in hedge funds, primarily multi-disciplinary hedge funds
that employ a fundamental

bottom-up

investment approach across various asset classes and strategies. The firm’s
investments in hedge funds primarily include interests where the underlying
assets are illiquid in nature, and proceeds from redemptions will not be
received until the underlying assets are liquidated or distributed, the timing
of which is uncertain.

Private equity and hedge funds described above are primarily “covered funds”
as defined in the Volcker Rule of the U.S. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). Substantially all of the credit and
real estate funds described above are not covered funds. The Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB) extended the conformance period
to July 2022 for the firm’s investments in, and relationships with, certain
legacy “illiquid funds” (as defined in the Volcker Rule) that were in place
prior to December 2013. This extension is applicable to substantially all of
the firm’s remaining investments in, and relationships with, such covered
funds. As of December 2021, the firm’s total investments in funds at NAV of
$3.47 billion included $903

million of investments in covered funds for which compliance with the Volcker
Rule will need to be achieved by July 2022.

The firm expects to achieve compliance for these covered funds through ongoing
harvesting of underlying fund investments in the ordinary course or through
structural modifications to these funds. To the extent that the firm is not
able to achieve compliance through these measures, the firm will be required
to sell its interests in such funds by July 2022. If that occurs, the firm may
receive a value for its interests that is less than the then carrying value as
there could be a limited secondary market for these investments and the firm
may be unable to sell them in orderly transactions.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents the fair value of investments in funds at NAV and the
related unfunded commitments.

Available-for-Sale

Securities

Available-for-sale

securities are accounted for at fair value, and the related unrealized fair
value gains and losses are included in accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss) unless designated in a fair value hedging relationship. See Note
7 for information about

available-for-sale

securities that are designated in a hedging relationship.

The table below presents information about

available-for-sale

securities by tenor.

In the table above:

Available-for-sale

securities were classified in level 1 of the fair value hierarchy as of both
December 2021 and December 2020.  

The weighted average yield for

available-for-sale

securities is computed using the effective interest rate of each security at
the end of the period, weighted based on the fair value of each security.  

The gross unrealized gains included in accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss) were $118 million and the gross unrealized losses included in
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) were $779 million as of December
2021 and primarily related to U.S. government obligations in a continuous
unrealized loss position for less than a year. The gross unrealized gains
included in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) were $631 million
and the gross unrealized losses included in accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss) were not material as of December 2020. Net unrealized
gains/(losses) included in other comprehensive income/(loss) were $(1.28)
billion ($(955) million, net of tax) for 2021 and $557 million ($417 million,
net of tax) for 2020.  

If the fair value of available-for-sale securities is less than amortized
cost, such securities are considered impaired. If the firm has the intent to
sell the debt security, or if it is more likely than not that the firm will be
required to sell the debt security before recovery of its amortized cost, the
difference between the amortized cost (net of allowance, if any) and the fair
value of the securities is recognized as an impairment loss in earnings. The
firm did not record any such impairment losses during either 2021 or 2020.
Impaired available-for-sale debt securities that the firm has the intent and
ability to hold are reviewed to determine if an allowance for credit losses
should be recorded. The firm considers various factors in such determination,
including market conditions, changes in issuer credit ratings and severity of
the unrealized losses. The firm did not record any provision for credit losses
on such securities during either 2021 or 2020.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents gross realized gains/(losses) and the proceeds from
the sales of available-for-sale securities.

In the table above, the realized gains/(losses) were reclassified from
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) to other principal transactions
in the consolidated statements of earnings.

Fair Value of Investments by Level

The table below presents investments accounted for at fair value by level
within the fair value hierarchy.

See Note 4 for an overview of the firm’s fair value measurement policies and
the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine the fair
value of investments.

Significant Unobservable Inputs

The table below presents the amount of level 3 investments, and ranges and
weighted averages of significant unobservable inputs used to value such
investments.

In the table above:

Ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the
valuation of each type of investment.  

Weighted averages are calculated by weighting each input by the relative fair
value of the investment.  

The ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the
appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one
investment. For example, the highest multiple for private equity securities is
appropriate for valuing a specific private equity security but may not be
appropriate for valuing any other private equity security. Accordingly, the
ranges of inputs do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair
value measurements of level 3 investments.  

Increases in yield, discount rate, capitalization rate or duration used in the
valuation of level 3 investments would have resulted in a lower fair value
measurement, while increases in recovery rate or multiples would have resulted
in a higher fair value measurement as of both December 2021 and December 2020.
Due to the distinctive nature of each level 3 investment, the
interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform within each product
type.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Corporate debt securities, securities backed by real estate and other debt
obligations are valued using discounted cash flows, and equity securities are
valued using market comparables and discounted cash flows.  

The fair value of any one instrument may be determined using multiple
valuation techniques. For example, market comparables and discounted cash
flows may be used together to determine fair value. Therefore, the level 3
balance encompasses both of these techniques.  

Level 3 Rollforward

The table below presents a summary of the changes in fair value for level 3
investments.

In the table above:

Changes in fair value are presented for all investments that are classified in
level 3 as of the end of the period.  

Net unrealized gains/(losses) relates to investments that were still held at

period-end.  

Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the
beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. If an investment was
transferred to level 3 during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss for
the period is classified in level 3.  

For level 3 investments, increases are shown as positive amounts, while
decreases are shown as negative amounts.  

The table below presents information, by product type, for investments
included in the summary table above.

Level 3 Rollforward Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 investments of $1.71 billion
(reflecting $449 million of net realized gains and $1.26 billion of net
unrealized gains) for 2021 included gains of $1.53 billion reported in other
principal transactions and $180 million reported in interest income.

The net unrealized gains on level 3 investments for 2021 primarily reflected
gains on certain private equity securities and corporate debt securities (in
each case, principally driven by corporate performance and company-specific
events).

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Transfers into level 3 investments during 2021 primarily reflected transfers
of certain corporate debt securities from level 2 (principally due to reduced
price transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence, including fewer
market transactions in these instruments, and certain unobservable yield and
duration inputs becoming significant to the valuation of these instruments)
and transfers of certain private equity securities from level 2 (principally
due to reduced price transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence,
including fewer market transactions in these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 investments during 2021 primarily reflected transfers
of certain private equity securities to level 2 (principally due to increased
price transparency as a result of market evidence, including market
transactions in these instruments) and transfers of certain corporate debt
securities to level 2 (principally due to certain unobservable yield and
duration inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of these
instruments, and increased price transparency as a result of market evidence,
including market transactions of these instruments).

Year Ended December 2020.

The net realized and unrealized losses on level 3 investments of $228 million
(reflecting $215 million of net realized gains and $443 million of net
unrealized losses) for 2020 included losses of $428 million reported in other
principal transactions and $200 million reported in interest income.

The net unrealized losses on level 3 investments for 2020 reflected losses on
certain private equity, corporate debt securities and securities backed by
real estate (in each case, principally driven by corporate performance).

Transfers into level 3 investments during 2020 primarily reflected transfers
of certain corporate debt securities from level 2 (principally due to reduced
price transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence, including fewer
transactions in these instruments, and certain unobservable yield and duration
inputs becoming significant to the valuation of these instruments) and
transfers of certain private equity securities from level 2 (principally due
to reduced price transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence,
including fewer transactions in these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 investments during 2020 primarily reflected transfers
of certain private equity securities and corporate debt securities to level 2
(principally due to increased price transparency as a result of market
evidence, including market transactions in these instruments).

Held-to-Maturity

Securities

Held-to-maturity

securities are accounted for at amortized cost.

The table below presents information about

held-to-maturity

securities by type and tenor.

In the table above:

Substantially all of the securities backed by real estate consist of
securities backed by residential real estate.  

As these securities are not accounted for at fair value, they are not included
in the firm’s fair value hierarchy in Notes 4 through 10. Had these securities
been included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy, U.S. government obligations
would have been classified in level 1 and securities backed by real estate
would have been primarily classified in level 2 of the fair value hierarchy as
of both December 2021 and December 2020.  

The weighted average yield for held-to-maturity securities is computed using
the effective interest rate of each security at the end of the period,
weighted based on the amortized cost of each security.  

Held-to-maturity

securities are reviewed to determine if an allowance for credit losses should
be recorded in the consolidated statements of earnings. The firm considers
various factors in such determination, including market conditions, changes in
issuer credit ratings, historical credit losses and sovereign guarantees.
Provision for credit losses on such securities was not material during either
2021 or 2020.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 9.

Loans

Loans include (i) loans held for investment that are accounted for at
amortized cost net of allowance for loan losses or at fair value under the
fair value option and (ii) loans held for sale that are accounted for at the
lower of cost or fair value. Interest on loans is recognized over the life of
the loan and is recorded on an accrual basis.

The table below presents information about loans.

In the table above, loans held for investment that are accounted for at
amortized cost include net deferred fees and costs, and unamortized premiums
and discounts, which are amortized over the life of the loan. These amounts
were less than 1% of loans accounted for at amortized cost as of both December
2021 and December 2020.

The following is a description of the loan types in the table above:

Corporate.

Corporate loans includes term loans, revolving lines of credit, letter of
credit facilities and bridge loans, and are principally used for operating and
general corporate purposes, or in connection with acquisitions. Corporate
loans may be secured or unsecured, depending on the loan purpose, the risk
profile of the borrower and other factors.  

Wealth Management.

Wealth management loans includes loans extended to private bank clients,
including wealth management and other clients. These loans are used to finance
investments in both financial and nonfinancial assets, bridge cash flow timing
gaps or provide liquidity for other needs. Substantially all of such loans are
secured by securities, residential real estate, commercial real estate or
other assets.  

Commercial Real Estate.

Commercial real estate loans includes originated loans (other than those
extended to private bank clients) that are directly or indirectly secured by
hotels, retail stores, multifamily housing complexes and commercial and
industrial properties. Commercial real estate loans also includes loans
extended to clients who warehouse assets that are directly or indirectly
backed by commercial real estate. In addition, commercial real estate includes
loans purchased by the firm.  

Residential Real Estate.

Residential real estate loans primarily includes loans extended by the firm to
clients (other than those extended to private bank clients) who warehouse
assets that are directly or indirectly secured by residential real estate and
loans purchased by the firm.  

Installment.

Installment loans are unsecured and are originated by the firm.  

Credit Cards.

Credit card loans are loans made pursuant to revolving lines of credit issued
to consumers by the firm.  

Other.

Other loans primarily includes loans extended to clients who warehouse assets
that are directly or indirectly secured by consumer loans, including auto
loans and private student loans, and other assets. Other loans also includes
unsecured consumer and credit card loans purchased by the firm.  

Credit Quality

Risk Assessment.

The firm’s risk assessment process includes evaluating the credit quality of
its loans by our independent risk oversight and control function. For
corporate loans and a majority of wealth management, real estate and other
loans, the firm performs credit reviews which include initial and ongoing
analyses of its borrowers, resulting in an internal credit rating. A credit
review is an analysis of the capacity and willingness of a borrower to meet
its financial obligations and is performed on an annual basis or more
frequently if circumstances change that indicate that a review may be
necessary. The determination of internal credit ratings also incorporates
assumptions with respect to the nature of and outlook for the borrower’s
industry and the economic environment.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents gross loans by an internally determined public rating
agency equivalent or other credit metrics and the concentration of secured and
unsecured loans.

In the table above:

Wealth management loans included in the other metrics/unrated category
primarily consists of loans backed by residential real estate and securities,
and real estate loans included in the other metrics/unrated category primarily
consists of purchased loans. The firm’s risk assessment process for these
loans includes reviewing certain key metrics, such as

loan-to-value

ratio, delinquency status, collateral values, expected cash flows, the Fair
Isaac Corporation (FICO) credit score (which measures a borrower’s
creditworthiness by considering factors such as payment and credit history)
and other risk factors.  

For installment and credit card loans included in the other metrics/unrated
category, the evaluation of credit quality incorporates the borrower’s FICO
credit score. FICO credit scores are periodically refreshed by the firm to
assess the updated creditworthiness of the borrower. See “Vintage” below for
information about installment and credit card loans by FICO credit scores.  

The firm also assigns a regulatory risk rating to its loans based on the
definitions provided by the U.S. federal bank regulatory agencies. Total loans
included 92% of loans as of December 2021 and 85% of loans as of December 2020
that were rated

pass/non-criticized.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Vintage.

The tables below present gross loans accounted for at amortized cost
(excluding installment and credit card loans) by an internally determined
public rating agency equivalent or other credit metrics and origination year
for term loans.

In the tables above, revolving loans which converted to term loans were not
material as of both December 2021 and December 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents gross installment loans by refreshed FICO credit
scores and origination year and gross credit card loans by refreshed FICO
credit scores.

In the table above, credit card loans consist of revolving lines of credit.

Credit Concentrations.

The table below presents the concentration of gross loans by region.

In the table above:

EMEA represents Europe, Middle East and Africa.  

Nonaccrual and Past Due Loans.

Loans accounted for at amortized cost (other than credit card loans) are
placed on nonaccrual status when it is probable that the firm will not collect
all principal and interest due under the contractual terms, regardless of the
delinquency status or if a loan is past due for 90 days or more, unless the
loan is both well collateralized and in the process of collection. At that
time, all accrued but uncollected interest is reversed against interest income
and interest subsequently collected is recognized on a cash basis to the
extent the loan balance is deemed collectible. Otherwise, all cash received is
used to reduce the outstanding loan balance. A loan is considered past due
when a principal or interest payment has not been made according to its
contractual terms. Credit card loans are not placed on nonaccrual status and
accrue interest until the loan is paid in full or is charged off.

In certain circumstances, the firm may modify the original terms of a loan
agreement by granting a concession to a borrower experiencing financial
difficulty, typically in the form of a modification of loan covenants, but may
also include forbearance of interest or principal, payment extensions or
interest rate reductions. These modifications, to the extent significant, are
considered troubled debt restructurings (TDRs). Loan modifications that extend
payment terms for a period of less than 90 days are generally considered
insignificant and therefore not reported as TDRs.

The firm adopted the relief issued under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security Act (CARES Act), as amended, and certain interpretive
guidance issued by the U.S. banking agencies that provides for certain
modified loans that would otherwise meet the definition of a TDR to not be
classified as such. Loans accounted for at amortized cost that were not
classified as TDRs as a result of this relief and interpretive guidance were
$166 million as of December 2021 and were $184 million as of December 2020.
The relief provided under the CARES Act expired in January 2022.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents information about past due loans.

The table below presents information about nonaccrual loans.

In the table above:

Nonaccrual loans included $267 million as of December 2021 and $315 million as
of December 2020 of corporate and commercial real estate loans that were
modified in a TDR. The firm’s lending commitments related to these loans were
not material as of both December 2021 and December 2020. Installment loans
that were modified in a TDR were not material as of both December 2021 and
December 2020.  

Allowance for Credit Losses

The firm’s allowance for credit losses consists of the allowance for losses on
loans and lending commitments accounted for at amortized cost. Loans and
lending commitments accounted for at fair value or accounted for at the lower
of cost or fair value are not subject to an allowance for credit losses.

To determine the allowance for credit losses, the firm classifies its loans
and lending commitments accounted for at amortized cost into wholesale and
consumer portfolios. These portfolios represent the level at which the firm
has developed and documented its methodology to determine the allowance for
credit losses. The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective
basis for loans that exhibit similar risk characteristics using a modeled
approach and asset-specific basis for loans that do not share similar risk
characteristics.

The allowance for credit losses takes into account the weighted average of a
range of forecasts of future economic conditions over the expected life of the
loan and lending commitments. The expected life of each loan or lending
commitment is determined based on the contractual term adjusted for extension
options or demand features, or is modeled in the case of revolving credit card
loans. The forecasts include baseline, favorable and adverse economic
scenarios over a three-year period. For loans with expected lives beyond three
years, the model reverts to historical loss information based on a

non-linear

modeled approach. The forecasted economic scenarios consider a number of risk
factors relevant to the wholesale and consumer portfolios described below. The
firm applies judgment in weighing individual scenarios each quarter based on a
variety of factors, including the firm’s internally derived economic outlook,
market consensus, recent macroeconomic conditions and industry trends.

The allowance for credit losses also includes qualitative components which
allow management to reflect the uncertain nature of economic forecasting,
capture uncertainty regarding model inputs, and account for model imprecision
and concentration risk.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Management’s estimate of credit losses entails judgment about loan
collectability at the reporting dates, and there are uncertainties inherent in
those judgments. The allowance for credit losses is subject to a governance
process that involves review and approval by senior management within the
firm’s independent risk oversight and control functions. Personnel within the
firm’s independent risk oversight and control functions are responsible for
forecasting the economic variables that underlie the economic scenarios that
are used in the modeling of expected credit losses. While management uses the
best information available to determine this estimate, future adjustments to
the allowance may be necessary based on, among other things, changes in the
economic environment or variances between actual results and the original
assumptions used.

The table below presents gross loans and lending commitments accounted for at
amortized cost by portfolio.

In the table above:

Credit card lending commitments included $33.97 billion as of December 2021
and $21.64 billion as of December 2020 related to credit card lines issued by
the firm to consumers. These credit card lines are cancellable by the firm.
Credit card lending commitments also included approximately $2.0 billion as of
December 2021 related to a commitment to acquire the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio.  

See Note 18 for further information about lending commitments.

The following is a description of the methodology used to calculate the
allowance for credit losses:

Wholesale.

The allowance for credit losses for wholesale loans and lending commitments
that exhibit similar risk characteristics is measured using a modeled
approach. These models determine the probability of default and loss given
default based on various risk factors, including internal credit ratings,
industry default and loss data, expected life, macroeconomic indicators, the
borrower’s capacity to meet its financial obligations, the borrower’s country
of risk and industry, loan seniority and collateral type. For lending
commitments, the methodology also considers probability of drawdowns or
funding. In addition, for loans backed by real estate, risk factors include
the loan-to-value ratio, debt service ratio and home price index. The most
significant inputs to the forecast model for wholesale loans and lending
commitments include unemployment rates, GDP, credit spreads, commercial and
industrial delinquency rates, short- and long-term interest rates, and oil
prices.

The allowance for loan losses for wholesale loans that do not share similar
risk characteristics, such as nonaccrual loans or loans in a TDR, is
calculated using the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at
the loan’s original effective rate, the observable market price of the loan or
the fair value of the collateral.

Wholesale loans are charged off against the allowance for loan losses when
deemed to be uncollectible.

Consumer.

The allowance for credit losses for consumer loans that exhibit similar risk
characteristics is calculated using a modeled approach which classifies
consumer loans into pools based on borrower-related and exposure-related
characteristics that differentiate a pool’s risk characteristics from other
pools. The factors considered in determining a pool are generally consistent
with the risk characteristics used for internal credit risk measurement and
management and include key metrics, such as FICO credit scores, delinquency
status, loan vintage and macroeconomic indicators. The most significant inputs
to the forecast model for consumer loans include unemployment rates and
delinquency rates. The expected life of revolving credit card loans is
determined by modeling expected future draws and the timing and amount of
repayments allocated to the funded balance. The firm also recognizes an
allowance for credit losses on commitments to acquire loans. However, no
allowance for credit losses is recognized on credit card lending commitments
as they are cancellable by the firm.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The allowance for credit losses for consumer loans that do not share similar
risk characteristics, such as loans in a TDR, is calculated using the present
value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s original
effective rate.

Installment loans are charged off when they are 120 days past due. Credit card
loans are charged off when they are 180 days past due.

Allowance for Credit Losses Rollforward

The table below presents information about the allowance for credit losses.

In the table above:

Other primarily represents the reduction to the allowance related to loans and
lending commitments transferred to held for sale.  

The allowance ratio is calculated by dividing the allowance for loan losses by
gross loans accounted for at amortized cost.  

The net

charge-off

ratio is calculated by dividing net charge-offs by average gross loans
accounted for at amortized cost.  

The beginning balance for the allowance for loan losses and allowance for
losses on lending commitments for 2020 reflects the cumulative effect of
measuring the allowance under the CECL standard as of January 1, 2020. The
cumulative effect was an increase in the allowance for credit losses of $679
million, which consisted of (i) an increase in the allowance for loan losses
of $727 million (an increase in the allowance for wholesale loans of $452
million, an increase in the allowance for consumer loans of $444 million and a
decrease in the allowance for PCI loans of $169 million) and (ii) a decrease
in the allowance for lending commitments of $48 million.  

Allowance for Credit Losses Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

The allowance for credit losses decreased by $82 million during 2021.

The provision for credit losses reflected growth in the firm’s lending
portfolios, primarily in the consumer portfolio related to credit cards,
including a provision for credit losses of approximately

million relating to the commitment to acquire the General Motors

co-branded

credit card portfolio, largely offset by reserve reduction driven by improved
broader economic environment.

Net charge-offs for 2021 for wholesale loans were primarily related to
corporate loans and net charge-offs for consumer loans were primarily related
to credit cards.

Forecast model inputs as of December 2021.

When modeling expected credit losses, the firm employs a weighted, multi-
scenario forecast, which includes baseline, adverse and favorable economic
scenarios. As of December 2021, this multi-scenario forecast was primarily
weighted towards the baseline economic scenario.

The table below presents the forecasted U.S. unemployment and U.S. GDP growth
rates used in the baseline economic scenario of the forecast model.

In addition, in the adverse economic scenario in the firm’s forecast model,
the U.S. unemployment rate peaks at

approximately 9.5%

during the first quarter of 2023 and the maximum decline in the quarterly U.S.
GDP relative to the fourth quarter of 2021 is

approximately 2.5%

, which occurs during the first quarter of 2023.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above:

U.S. unemployment rate represents the rate forecasted as of the respective

quarter-end.  

Growth in U.S. GDP represents the year-over-year growth rate forecasted for
the respective years.  

While the U.S. unemployment and U.S. GDP growth rates are significant inputs
to the forecast model, the model contemplates a variety of other inputs across
a range of scenarios to provide a forecast of future economic conditions.
Given the complex nature of the forecasting process, no single economic
variable can be viewed in isolation and independently of other inputs.  

Year Ended December 2020.

The allowance for credit losses increased by $2.63 billion during 2020
reflecting $679 million relating to the impact of CECL adoption and $1.95
billion from activity during the period.

The provision for credit losses for wholesale and consumer loans reflected the
impact of the coronavirus

(COVID-19)

pandemic on economic conditions, which resulted in higher modeled expected
losses and lower recoveries. In addition, the provision for credit losses for
wholesale loans was impacted by asset-specific provisions and ratings
downgrades primarily related to borrowers in the diversified industrials,
technology, media & telecommunications and natural resources industries.
Besides the weaker economic outlook related to the

COVID-19

pandemic, the provision for credit losses for consumer loans for 2020 was also
impacted by the growth of the credit card portfolio.

Net charge-offs for 2020 for wholesale loans were primarily related to
corporate loans and net charge-offs for consumer loans were primarily related
to installment loans.

Fair Value of Loans by Level

The table below presents loans held for investment accounted for at fair value
under the fair value option by level within the fair value hierarchy.

The gains as a result of changes in the fair value of loans held for
investment for which the fair value option was elected were $216 million for
2021 and $151 million for 2020. These gains were included in other principal
transactions.

See Note 4 for an overview of the firm’s fair value measurement policies and
the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine the fair
value of loans.

Significant Unobservable Inputs

The table below presents the amount of level 3 loans, and ranges and weighted
averages of significant unobservable inputs used to value such loans.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above:

Ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the
valuation of each type of loan.  

Weighted averages are calculated by weighting each input by the relative fair
value of the loan.  

The ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the
appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one loan. For
example, the highest yield for residential real estate loans is appropriate
for valuing a specific residential real estate loan but may not be appropriate
for valuing any other residential real estate loan. Accordingly, the ranges of
inputs do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair value
measurements of level 3 loans.  

Increases in yield or duration used in the valuation of level 3 loans would
have resulted in a lower fair value measurement, while increases in recovery
rate would have resulted in a higher fair value measurement as of both
December 2021 and December 2020. Due to the distinctive nature of each level 3
loan, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform within each
product type.  

Loans are valued using discounted cash flows.  

Level 3 Rollforward

The table below presents a summary of the changes in fair value for level 3
loans.

In the table above:

Changes in fair value are presented for loans that are classified in level 3
as of the end of the period.  

Net unrealized gains/(losses) relates to loans that were still held at

period-end.  

Purchases includes originations and secondary purchases.  

Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the
beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. If a loan was
transferred to level 3 during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss for
the period is classified in level 3.  

The table below presents information, by loan type, for loans included in the
summary table above.

Level 3 Rollforward Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 loans of $66 million
(reflecting $99 million of net realized gains and $33 million of net
unrealized losses) for 2021 included gains of $42 million reported in other
principal transactions and $24 million reported in interest income.

The drivers of the net unrealized losses on level 3 loans for 2021 were not
material.

Transfers into level 3 loans during 2021 primarily reflected transfers of
certain loans backed by commercial real estate from level 2 (principally due
to certain unobservable yield and duration inputs becoming significant to the
valuation of these instruments) and transfers of certain corporate loans from
level 2 (principally due to reduced price transparency as a result of a lack
of market evidence, including fewer market transactions in these instruments).

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Transfers out of level 3 loans during 2021 primarily reflected transfers of
certain corporate loans and wealth management and other loans to level 2 (in
each case, principally due to increased price transparency as a result of
market evidence, including market transactions in these instruments).

Year Ended December 2020.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 loans of $159 million
(reflecting $72 million of net realized gains and $87 million of net
unrealized gains) for 2020 included gains of $135 million reported in other
principal transactions and $24 million reported in interest income.

The drivers of the net unrealized gains on level 3 loans for 2020 were not
material.

Transfers into level 3 loans during 2020 reflected transfers of certain loans
backed by commercial real estate, corporate loans, and wealth management and
other loans from level 2 (in each case, principally due to reduced price
transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence, including fewer market
transactions in these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 loans during 2020 reflected transfers of certain
corporate loans to level 2 (principally due to duration and yield inputs no
longer being significant to the valuation of these loans and increased price
transparency as a result of increased market evidence, including market
transactions in these instruments).

Estimated Fair Value

The table below presents the estimated fair value of loans that are not
accounted for at fair value and in what level of the fair value hierarchy they
would have been classified if they had been included in the firm’s fair value
hierarchy.

Note 10.

Fair Value Option

Other Financial Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value

In addition to trading assets and liabilities, and certain investments and
loans, the firm accounts for certain of its other financial assets and
liabilities at fair value, substantially all under the fair value option. The
primary reasons for electing the fair value option are to:

Reflect economic events in earnings on a timely basis;  

Mitigate volatility in earnings from using different measurement attributes
(e.g., transfers of financial assets accounted for as financings are recorded
at fair value, whereas the related secured financing would be recorded on an
accrual basis absent electing the fair value option); and  

Address simplification and cost-benefit considerations (e.g., accounting for
hybrid financial instruments at fair value in their entirety versus
bifurcation of embedded derivatives and hedge accounting for debt hosts).  

Hybrid financial instruments are instruments that contain bifurcatable
embedded derivatives and do not require settlement by physical delivery of
nonfinancial assets (e.g., physical commodities). If the firm elects to
bifurcate the embedded derivative from the associated debt, the derivative is
accounted for at fair value and the host contract is accounted for at
amortized cost, adjusted for the effective portion of any fair value hedges.
If the firm does not elect to bifurcate, the entire hybrid financial
instrument is accounted for at fair value under the fair value option.

Other financial assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value under the
fair value option include:

Resale and repurchase agreements;  

Certain securities borrowed and loaned transactions;  

Certain customer and other receivables and certain other liabilities;  

Certain time deposits (deposits with no stated maturity are not eligible for a
fair value option election), including structured certificates of deposit,
which are hybrid financial instruments;  

Substantially all other secured financings, including transfers of assets
accounted for as financings; and  

Certain unsecured short- and long-term borrowings, substantially all of which
are hybrid financial instruments.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Fair Value of Other Financial Assets and Liabilities by Level

The table below presents, by level within the fair value hierarchy, other
financial assets and liabilities at fair value, substantially all of which are
accounted for at fair value under the fair value option.

In the table above, other financial assets are shown as positive amounts and
other financial liabilities are shown as negative amounts.

See Note 4 for an overview of the firm’s fair value measurement policies and
the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine the fair
value of other financial assets and liabilities.

Significant Unobservable Inputs

See below for information about the significant unobservable inputs used to
value level 3 other financial assets and liabilities at fair value as of both
December 2021 and December 2020.

Other Secured Financings.

The ranges and weighted averages of significant unobservable inputs used to
value level 3 other secured financings are presented below. These ranges and
weighted averages exclude unobservable inputs that are only relevant to a
single instrument, and therefore are not meaningful.

As of December 2021:

As of December 2020:

Generally, increases in yield or duration, in isolation, would have resulted
in a lower fair value measurement as of

period-end.

Due to the distinctive nature of each of level 3 other secured financings, the
interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform across such financings.
See Note 11 for further information about other secured financings.

Deposits, Unsecured Borrowings and Other Liabilities.

Substantially all of the firm’s deposits, unsecured short- and long-term
borrowings, and other liabilities that are classified in level 3 are hybrid
financial instruments. As the significant unobservable inputs used to value
hybrid financial instruments primarily relate to the embedded derivative
component of these deposits, unsecured borrowings and other liabilities, these
unobservable inputs are incorporated in the firm’s derivative disclosures in
Note 7. See Note 13 for further information about deposits, Note 14 for
further information about unsecured borrowings and Note 15 for further
information about other liabilities.

Repurchase Agreements.

As of December 2021, the firm had no level 3 repurchase agreements. As of
December 2020, the firm’s level 3 repurchase agreements were not material.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Level 3 Rollforward

The table below presents a summary of the changes in fair value for level 3
other financial liabilities accounted for at fair value.

In the table above:

Changes in fair value are presented for all other financial liabilities that
are classified in level 3 as of the end of the period.  

Net unrealized gains/(losses) relates to other financial liabilities that were
still held at

period-end.  

Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the
beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. If a financial
liability was transferred to level 3 during a reporting period, its entire
gain or loss for the period is classified in level 3.  

For level 3 other financial liabilities, increases are shown as negative
amounts, while decreases are shown as positive amounts.  

Level 3 other financial liabilities are frequently economically hedged with
trading assets and liabilities. Accordingly, gains or losses that are
classified in level 3 can be partially offset by gains or losses attributable
to level 1, 2 or 3 trading assets and liabilities. As a result, gains or
losses included in the level 3 rollforward below do not necessarily represent
the overall impact on the firm’s results of operations, liquidity or capital
resources.  

The table below presents information, by the consolidated balance sheet line
items, for liabilities included in the summary table above.

Level 3 Rollforward Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

The net realized and unrealized gains on level 3 other financial liabilities
of $424 million (reflecting $401 million of net realized losses and $825
million of net unrealized gains) for 2021 included gains/(losses) of $355
million reported in market making, $32 million reported in other principal
transactions and $(20) million reported in interest expense in the
consolidated statements of earnings, and $57 million reported in debt
valuation adjustment in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The net unrealized gains on level 3 other financial liabilities for 2021
primarily reflected gains on certain hybrid financial instruments included in
unsecured long- and short-term borrowings (principally due to an increase in
interest rates).

Transfers into level 3 other financial liabilities during 2021 primarily
reflected transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments included in
unsecured long- and short-term borrowings from level 2 (principally due to
reduced price transparency of certain volatility and correlation inputs used
to value these instruments) and certain other secured financings from level 2
(principally due to reduced price transparency of certain yield and duration
inputs used to value these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 other financial liabilities during 2021 primarily
reflected transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments included in
unsecured long- and short-term borrow

in

gs to level 2 (principally due to increased price transparency of certain
volatility and correlation inputs used to value these instruments, and certain
unobservable volatility inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of
these instruments) and certain other secured financings to level 2
(principally due to increased price transparency of certain yield and duration
inputs used to value these instruments).

Year Ended December 2020.

The net realized and unrealized losses on level 3 other financial liabilities
of $1.62 billion (reflecting $317 million of net realized losses and $1.30
billion of net unrealized losses) for 2020 included losses of $1.44 billion
reported in market making, $28 million reported in other principal
transactions and $15 million reported in interest expense in the consolidated
statements of earnings, and $139 million reported in debt valuation adjustment
in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.

The net unrealized losses on level 3 other financial liabilities for 2020
primarily reflected losses on certain hybrid financial instruments included in
unsecured long- and short-term borrowings (principally due to an increase in
global equity prices), and losses on certain hybrid financial instruments
included in deposits (principally due to an increase in the market value of
the underlying assets).

Transfers into level 3 other financial liabilities during 2020 primarily
reflected transfers of certain other secured financings from level 2
(principally due to reduced price transparency of certain yield and duration
inputs used to value these instruments), and certain hybrid financial
instruments included in unsecured long- and short-term borrowings from level 2
(principally due to reduced price transparency of certain volatility and
correlation inputs used to value these instruments).

Transfers out of level 3 other financial liabilities during 2020 primarily
reflected transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments included in
unsecured short-term borrowings to level 2 (principally due to increased price
transparency of certain volatility and correlation inputs used to value these
instruments).

Gains and Losses on Other Financial Assets and Liabilities Accounted for at
Fair Value Under the Fair Value Option

The table below presents the gains and losses recognized in earnings as a
result of the election to apply the fair value option to certain financial
assets and liabilities.

In the table above:

Gains/(losses) were substantially all included in market making.  

Gains/(losses) exclude contractual interest, which is included in interest
income and interest expense, for all instruments other than hybrid financial
instruments. See Note 23 for further information about interest income and
interest expense.  

Gains/(losses) included in unsecured short- and long-term borrowings were
substantially all related to the embedded derivative component of hybrid
financial instruments for 2021, 2020 and 2019. These gains and losses would
have been recognized under other U.S. GAAP even if the firm had not elected to
account for the entire hybrid financial instrument at fair value.  

Other primarily consists of gains/(losses) on customer and other receivables,
deposits, other secured financings and other liabilities.  

Other financial assets and liabilities at fair value are frequently
economically hedged with trading assets and liabilities. Accordingly, gains or
losses on such other financial assets and liabilities can be partially offset
by gains or losses on trading assets and liabilities. As a result, gains or
losses on other financial assets and liabilities do not necessarily represent
the overall impact on the firm’s results of operations, liquidity or capital
resources.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

See Note 8 for information about gains/(losses) on equity securities and Note
9 for information about gains/(losses) on loans which are accounted for at
fair value under the fair value option. Gains/(losses) on trading assets and
liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair value option are
included in market making. See Note 5 for further information about
gains/(losses) from market making.

Long-Term Debt Instruments

The difference between the aggregate contractual principal amount and the
related fair value of long-term other secured financings, for which the fair
value option was elected, was not material as of both December 2021 and
December 2020.

The difference between the aggregate contractual principal amount and the
related fair value of unsecured long-term borrowings, for which the fair value
option was elected, was not material as of December 2021, and the fair value
exceeded the aggregate contractual principal amount by $445 million as of
December 2020. The amount above includes both principal-protected and

non-principal-protected

long-term borrowings.

Debt Valuation Adjustment

The firm calculates the fair value of financial liabilities for which the fair
value option is elected by discounting future cash flows at a rate which
incorporates the firm’s credit spreads.

The table below presents information about the net debt valuation adjustment
(DVA) gains/(losses) on financial liabilities for which the fair value option
was elected.

In the table above:

After tax DVA is included in debt valuation adjustment in the consolidated
statements of comprehensive income.  

The gains/(losses) reclassified to market making in the consolidated
statements of earnings from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) upon
extinguishment of such financial liabilities were not material for 2021, 2020
and 2019.  

Loans and Lending Commitments

The table below presents the difference between the aggregate fair value and
the aggregate contractual principal amount for loans (included in trading
assets and loans in the consolidated balance sheets) for which the fair value
option was elected.

In the table above, the aggregate contractual principal amount of loans on
nonaccrual status and/or more than 90 days past due (which excludes loans
carried at zero fair value and considered uncollectible) exceeds the related
fair value primarily because the firm regularly purchases loans, such as
distressed loans, at values significantly below the contractual principal
amounts.

The fair value of unfunded lending commitments for which the fair value option
was elected was a liability of $20 million as of December 2021 and $25 million
as of December 2020, and the related total contractual amount of these lending
commitments was $611 million as of December 2021 and $1.64 billion as of
December 2020. See Note 18 for further information about lending commitments.

Impact of Credit Spreads on Loans and Lending Commitments

The estimated net gain/(loss) attributable to changes in instrument-specific
credit spreads on loans and lending commitments for which the fair value
option was elected was $277 million for 2021, $(106) million for 2020 and $134
million for 2019. The firm generally calculates the fair value of loans and
lending commitments for which the fair value option is elected by discounting
future cash flows at a rate which incorporates the instrument-specific credit
spreads. For floating-rate loans and lending commitments, substantially all
changes in fair value are attributable to changes in instrument-specific
credit spreads, whereas for fixed-rate loans and lending commitments, changes
in fair value are also attributable to changes in interest rates.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 11.

Collateralized Agreements and Financings

Collateralized agreements are resale agreements and securities borrowed.
Collateralized financings are repurchase agreements, securities loaned and
other secured financings. The firm enters into these transactions in order to,
among other things, facilitate client activities, invest excess cash, acquire
securities to cover short positions and finance certain firm activities.

Collateralized agreements and financings are presented on a

net-by-counterparty

basis when a legal right of setoff exists. Interest on collateralized
agreements, which is included in interest income, and collateralized
financings, which is included in interest expense, is recognized over the life
of the transaction. See Note 23 for further information about interest income
and interest expense.

Resale and Repurchase Agreements

A resale agreement is a transaction in which the firm purchases financial
instruments from a seller, typically in exchange for cash, and simultaneously
enters into an agreement to resell the same or substantially the same
financial instruments to the seller at a stated price plus accrued interest at
a future date.

A repurchase agreement is a transaction in which the firm sells financial
instruments to a buyer, typically in exchange for cash, and simultaneously
enters into an agreement to repurchase the same or substantially the same
financial instruments from the buyer at a stated price plus accrued interest
at a future date.

Even though repurchase and resale agreements (including “repos- and

reverses-to-maturity”)

involve the legal transfer of ownership of financial instruments, they are
accounted for as financing arrangements because they require the financial
instruments to be repurchased or resold before or at the maturity of the
agreement. The financial instruments purchased or sold in resale and
repurchase agreements typically include U.S. government and agency, and
investment-grade sovereign obligations.

The firm receives financial instruments purchased under resale agreements and
makes delivery of financial instruments sold under repurchase agreements. To
mitigate credit exposure, the firm monitors the market value of these
financial instruments on a daily basis, and delivers or obtains additional
collateral due to changes in the market value of the financial instruments, as
appropriate. For resale agreements, the firm typically requires collateral
with a fair value approximately equal to the carrying value of the relevant
assets in the consolidated balance sheets.

Securities Borrowed and Loaned Transactions

In a securities borrowed transaction, the firm borrows securities from a
counterparty in exchange for cash or securities. When the firm returns the
securities, the counterparty returns the cash or securities. Interest is
generally paid periodically over the life of the transaction.

In a securities loaned transaction, the firm lends securities to a
counterparty in exchange for cash or securities. When the counterparty returns
the securities, the firm returns the cash or securities posted as collateral.
Interest is generally paid periodically over the life of the transaction.

The firm receives securities borrowed and makes delivery of securities loaned.
To mitigate credit exposure, the firm monitors the market value of these
securities on a daily basis, and delivers or obtains additional collateral due
to changes in the market value of the securities, as appropriate. For
securities borrowed transactions, the firm typically requires collateral with
a fair value approximately equal to the carrying value of the securities
borrowed transaction.

Securities borrowed and loaned within Fixed Income, Currency and Commodities
(FICC) financing are recorded at fair value under the fair value option. See
Note 10 for further information about securities borrowed and loaned accounted
for at fair value.

Substantially all of securities borrowed and loaned within Equities financing
are recorded based on the amount of cash collateral advanced or received plus
accrued interest. The firm also reviews such securities borrowed to determine
if an allowance for credit losses should be recorded by taking into
consideration the fair value of collateral received. As these agreements
generally can be terminated on demand, they exhibit little, if any,
sensitivity to changes in interest rates. Therefore, the carrying value of
such agreements approximates fair value. As these agreements are not accounted
for at fair value, they are not included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy in
Notes 4 through 10. Had these agreements been included in the firm’s fair
value hierarchy, they would have been classified in level 2 as of both
December 2021 and December 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Offsetting Arrangements

The table below presents resale and repurchase agreements and securities
borrowed and loaned transactions included in the consolidated balance sheets,
as well as the amounts not offset in the consolidated balance sheets.

In the table above:

Substantially all of the gross carrying values of these arrangements are
subject to enforceable netting agreements.  

Where the firm has received or posted collateral under credit support
agreements, but has not yet determined such agreements are enforceable, the
related collateral has not been netted.  

Amounts not offset includes counterparty netting that does not meet the
criteria for netting under U.S. GAAP and the fair value of collateral received
or posted subject to enforceable credit support agreements.  

Resale agreements and repurchase agreements are carried at fair value under
the fair value option. See Note 4 for further information about the valuation
techniques and significant inputs used to determine fair value.  

Securities borrowed included in the consolidated balance sheets of $39.96
billion as of December 2021 and $28.90 billion as of December 2020, and
securities loaned of $9.17 billion as of December 2021 and $1.05 billion as of
December 2020 were at fair value under the fair value option. See Note 10 for
further information about securities borrowed and securities loaned accounted
for at fair value.  

Gross Carrying Value of Repurchase Agreements and Securities Loaned

The table below presents the gross carrying value of repurchase agreements and
securities loaned by class of collateral pledged.

The table below presents the gross carrying value of repurchase agreements and
securities loaned by maturity.

In the table above:

Repurchase agreements and securities loaned that are repayable prior to
maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates.  

Repurchase agreements and securities loaned that are redeemable prior to
maturity at the option of the holder are reflected at the earliest dates such
options become exercisable.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Other Secured Financings

In addition to repurchase agreements and securities loaned transactions, the
firm funds certain assets through the use of other secured financings and
pledges financial instruments and other assets as collateral in these
transactions. These other secured financings include:

Liabilities of consolidated VIEs;  

Transfers of assets accounted for as financings rather than sales (e.g.,
pledged commodities, bank loans and mortgage whole loans); and  

Other structured financing arrangements.  

Other secured financings included nonrecourse arrangements. Nonrecourse other
secured financings were $8.64 billion as of December 2021 and $12.31 billion
as of December 2020.

The firm has elected to apply the fair value option to substantially all other
secured financings because the use of fair value eliminates

non-economic

volatility in earnings that would arise from using different measurement
attributes. See Note 10 for further information about other secured financings
that are accounted for at fair value.

Other secured financings that are not recorded at fair value are recorded
based on the amount of cash received plus accrued interest, which generally
approximates fair value. As these financings are not accounted for at fair
value, they are not included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy in Notes 4
through 10. Had these financings been included in the firm’s fair value
hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level 3 as of both
December 2021 and December 2020.

The table below presents information about other secured financings.

In the table above:

Short-term other secured financings includes financings maturing within one
year of the financial statement date and financings that are redeemable within
one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder.  

Non-U.S. dollar-denominated short-term other secured financings at amortized
cost had a weighted average interest rate of 0.22% as of December 2021. This
rate includes the effect of hedging activities.  

U.S. dollar-denominated long-term other secured financings at amortized cost
had a weighted average interest rate of 1.06% as of December 2021 and 1.27% as
of December 2020. These rates include the effect of hedging activities.  

Non-U.S.

dollar-denominated long-term other secured financings at amortized cost had a
weighted average interest rate of 0.46% as of December 2021 and 0.40% as of
December 2020. These rates include the effect of hedging activities.  

Total other secured financings included $1.97 billion as of December 2021 and
$2.05 billion as of December 2020 related to transfers of financial assets
accounted for as financings rather than sales. Such financings were
collateralized by financial assets, primarily included in trading assets, of
$2.02 billion as of December 2021 and $2.26 billion as of December 2020.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Other secured financings collateralized by financial instruments included
$10.37 billion as of December 2021 and $11.28 billion as of December 2020 of
other secured financings collateralized by trading assets, investments and
loans, and included $2.45 billion as of December 2021 and $5.63 billion as of
December 2020 of other secured financings collateralized by financial
instruments received as collateral and repledged.  

The table below presents other secured financings by maturity.

In the table above:

Long-term other secured financings that are repayable prior to maturity at the
option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.  

Long-term other secured financings that are redeemable prior to maturity at
the option of the holder are reflected at the earliest dates such options
become exercisable.  

Collateral Received and Pledged

The firm receives cash and securities (e.g., U.S. government and agency
obligations, other sovereign and corporate obligations, as well as equity
securities) as collateral, primarily in connection with resale agreements,
securities borrowed, derivative transactions and customer margin loans. The
firm obtains cash and securities as collateral on an upfront or contingent
basis for derivative instruments and collateralized agreements to reduce its
credit exposure to individual counterparties.

In many cases, the firm is permitted to deliver or repledge financial
instruments received as collateral when entering into repurchase agreements
and securities loaned transactions, primarily in connection with secured
client financing activities. The firm is also permitted to deliver or repledge
these financial instruments in connection with other secured financings,
collateralized derivative transactions and firm or customer settlement
requirements.

The firm also pledges certain trading assets in connection with repurchase
agreements, securities loaned transactions and other secured financings, and
other assets (substantially all real estate and cash) in connection with other
secured financings to counterparties who may or may not have the right to
deliver or repledge them.

The table below presents financial instruments at fair value received as
collateral that were available to be delivered or repledged and were delivered
or repledged.

The table below presents information about assets pledged.

The firm also segregates securities for regulatory and other purposes related
to client activity. Such securities are segregated from trading assets and
investments, as well as from securities received as collateral under resale
agreements and securities borrowed transactions. Securities segregated by the
firm were $41.49 billion as of December 2021 and $32.97 billion as of December

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 12.

Other Assets

The table below presents other assets by type.

Property, Leasehold Improvements and Equipment

Property, leasehold improvements and equipment is net of accumulated
depreciation and amortization of $10.81 billion as of December 2021 and $10.12
billion as of December 2020. Property, leasehold improvements and equipment
included $6.71 billion as of December 2021 and $6.54 billion as of December
2020 that the firm uses in connection with its operations, and $194 million as
of December 2021 and $318 million as of December 2020 of foreclosed real
estate primarily related to distressed loans that were purchased by the firm.
The remainder is held by investment entities, including VIEs, consolidated by
the firm. Substantially all property and equipment is depreciated on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. Leasehold improvements
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the useful life of
the improvement or the term of the lease. Capitalized costs of software
developed or obtained for internal use are amortized on a straight-line basis
over three years.

The firm tests property, leasehold improvements and equipment for impairment
when events or changes in circumstances suggest that an asset’s or asset
group’s carrying value may not be fully recoverable. To the extent the
carrying value of an asset or asset group exceeds the projected undiscounted
cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposal of the asset
or asset group, the firm determines the asset or asset group is impaired and
records an impairment equal to the difference between the estimated fair value
and the carrying value of the asset or asset group. In addition, the firm will
recognize an impairment prior to the sale of an asset or asset group if the
carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds its estimated fair value.

The firm had impairments of $143 million during 2021 and $171 million during
2020, primarily related to properties held by the firm’s investment entities.
There were no material impairments during 2019.

Goodwill

Goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net
assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the acquisition date.

The table below presents the carrying value of goodwill by reporting unit.

Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more
frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an impairment
may exist. When assessing goodwill for impairment, first, a qualitative
assessment can be made to determine whether it is more likely than not that
the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its estimated
carrying value. If the results of the qualitative assessment are not
conclusive, a quantitative goodwill test is performed. Alternatively, a
quantitative goodwill test can be performed without performing a qualitative
assessment.

The quantitative goodwill test compares the estimated fair value of each
reporting unit with its estimated net book value (including goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets). If the reporting unit’s estimated fair value
exceeds its estimated net book value, goodwill is not impaired. An impairment
is recognized if the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its
estimated net book value.

To estimate the fair value of each reporting unit, other than Consumer
banking, a relative value technique is used because the firm believes market
participants would use this technique to value these reporting units. The
relative value technique applies observable

price-to-earnings

multiples or

price-to-book

multiples of comparable competitors to reporting units’ net earnings or net
book value. To estimate the fair value of Consumer banking, a discounted cash
flow valuation approach is used because the firm believes market participants
would use this technique to value that reporting unit given its early stage of
development. The estimated net carrying value of each reporting unit reflects
an allocation of total shareholders’ equity and represents the estimated
amount of total shareholders’ equity required to support the activities of the
reporting unit under currently applicable regulatory capital requirements.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the fourth quarter of 2021, the firm performed its annual assessment of
goodwill for impairment, for each of its reporting units, by performing a
qualitative assessment. Multiple factors were assessed with respect to each of
the firm’s reporting units to determine whether it was more likely than not
that the estimated fair value of any of those reporting units was less than
its estimated carrying value. The qualitative assessment also considered
changes since a quantitative test was last performed in 2019.

The firm considered the following factors in the qualitative annual assessment
when evaluating whether it was more likely than not that the estimated fair
value of a reporting unit was less than its estimated carrying value:

Performance Indicators.

During 2021, the firm’s net revenues, diluted earnings per common share (EPS),
return on average common shareholders’ equity and book value per common share
all increased from 2020 and from when a quantitative test was last performed
in 2019. The firm’s operating expenses increased, primarily reflecting
significantly higher compensation and benefits expenses (reflecting strong
financial performance). Despite the increase in expenses, both the efficiency
ratio (total operating expenses divided by total net revenues) and

pre-tax

margin improved compared with 2020.  

Macroeconomic Indicators.

The global economy continued to recover during 2021 from the impact of the

COVID-19

pandemic, as the lifting of health and safety restrictions amid vaccine
distribution facilitated an increase in global economic recovery, and monetary
and fiscal policy from central banks and governments remained accommodative.
However, there remains uncertainty related to the impact and the duration of
the

COVID-19

pandemic.  

Firm and Industry Events.

There were no events, entity-specific or otherwise, that would have had a
significant negative impact on the valuation of the firm’s reporting units.  

Fair Value Indicators.

Since the 2020 qualitative goodwill test, fair value indicators in the market
generally improved, as global equity prices were higher, credit spreads were
tighter, and the firm and its peers’ stock prices and

price-to-book

multiples were higher. Despite increased inflation concerns, supply chain
challenges and the rise in COVID-19 cases in the fourth quarter of 2021, the
firm’s stock price and

price-to-book

multiple ended the year higher compared with the end of 2020.  

As a result of the qualitative assessment, the firm determined that it was
more likely than not that the estimated fair value of each reporting unit
exceeded its respective estimated carrying value. Therefore, the firm
determined that goodwill for each reporting unit was not impaired and that a
quantitative goodwill test was not required.

Identifiable Intangible Assets

The table below presents identifiable intangible assets by reporting unit and
type.

During 2021, the amount of intangible assets acquired by the firm was not
material. The firm acquired $155 million of intangible assets during 2020,
primarily related to acquired leases and customer lists, with a weighted
average amortization period of 10 years.

Substantially all of the firm’s identifiable intangible assets have finite
useful lives and are amortized over their estimated useful lives generally
using the straight-line method.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The tables below present information about the amortization of identifiable
intangible assets.

The firm tests intangible assets for impairment when events or changes in
circumstances suggest that an asset’s or asset group’s carrying value may not
be fully recoverable. To the extent the carrying value of an asset or asset
group exceeds the projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from
the use and eventual disposal of the asset or asset group, the firm determines
the asset or asset group is impaired and records an impairment equal to the
difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of the
asset or asset group. In addition, the firm will recognize an impairment prior
to the sale of an asset or asset group if the carrying value of the asset or
asset group exceeds its estimated fair value. There were no material
impairments during 2021, 2020 or 2019.

Operating Lease

Right-of-Use

Assets

The firm enters into operating leases for real estate, office equipment and
other assets, substantially all of which are used in connection with its
operations. For leases longer than one year, the firm recognizes a

right-of-use

asset representing the right to use the underlying asset for the lease term,
and a lease liability representing the liability to make payments. The lease
term is generally determined based on the contractual maturity of the lease.
For leases where the firm has the option to terminate or extend the lease, an
assessment of the likelihood of exercising the option is incorporated into the
determination of the lease term. Such assessment is initially performed at the
inception of the lease and is updated if events occur that impact the original
assessment.

An operating lease

right-of-use

asset is initially determined based on the operating lease liability, adjusted
for initial direct costs, lease incentives and amounts paid at or prior to
lease commencement. This amount is then amortized over the lease term. The
firm recognized $305 million for 2021, $182 million for 2020 and $963 million
(primarily related to the firm’s European headquarters in London) for 2019 of

right-of-use

assets and operating lease liabilities in

non-cash

transactions for leases entered into or assumed. See Note 15 for information
about operating lease liabilities.

For leases where the firm will derive no economic benefit from leased space
that it has vacated or where the firm has shortened the term of a lease when
space is no longer needed, the firm will record an impairment or accelerated
amortization of

right-of-use

assets. There were no material impairments or accelerated amortizations during
2021 and 2020.

Miscellaneous Receivables and Other

Miscellaneous receivables and other included:

Assets classified as held for sale of $1.02 billion as of December 2021 and
$437 million as of December 2020 related to certain of the firm’s consolidated
investments within the Asset Management segment, substantially all of which
consisted of property and equipment.  

Note 13.

Deposits

The table below presents the types and sources of deposits.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above:

Substantially all deposits are interest-bearing.  

Savings and demand accounts consist of money market deposit accounts,
negotiable order of withdrawal accounts and demand deposit accounts that have
no stated maturity or expiration date.  

Time deposits included $35.43 billion as of December 2021 and $16.18 billion
as of December 2020 of deposits accounted for at fair value under the fair
value option. See Note 10 for further information about deposits accounted for
at fair value.  

Deposit sweep programs include long-term contractual agreements with U.S.
broker-dealers who sweep client cash to FDIC-insured deposits. As of December
2021, the firm had 15 such deposit sweep program agreements.  

Transaction banking deposits consists of deposits that the firm raised through
its cash management services business for corporate and other institutional
clients.  

Other deposits represent deposits from institutional clients.  

The table below presents the location of deposits.

In the table above, U.S. deposits were held at Goldman Sachs Bank USA (GS Bank
USA) and substantially all

non-U.S.

deposits were held at Goldman Sachs International Bank (GSIB).

The table below presents maturities of time deposits held in U.S. and

non-U.S.

offices.

As of December 2021, deposits in U.S. offices included $25.44 billion and
deposits in

non-U.S.

offices included $32.73 billion of time deposits in denominations that met or
exceeded the applicable insurance limits, or were otherwise not covered by
insurance.

The firm’s savings and demand deposits are recorded based on the amount of
cash received plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value. In
addition, the firm designates certain derivatives as fair value hedges to
convert a portion of its time deposits not accounted for at fair value from
fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations. The carrying value of
time deposits not accounted for at fair value approximated fair value as of
both December 2021 and December 2020. As these savings and demand deposits and
time deposits are not accounted for at fair value, they are not included in
the firm’s fair value hierarchy in Notes 4 through 10. Had these deposits been
included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy, they would have been classified
in level 2 as of both December 2021 and December 2020.

Note 14.

Unsecured Borrowings

The table below presents information about unsecured borrowings.

Unsecured Short-Term Borrowings

Unsecured short-term borrowings includes the portion of unsecured long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement date and
unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the
financial statement date at the option of the holder.

The firm accounts for certain hybrid financial instruments at fair value under
the fair value option. See Note 10 for further information about unsecured
short-term borrowings that are accounted for at fair value. In addition, the
firm designates certain derivatives as fair value hedges to convert a portion
of its unsecured short-term borrowings not accounted for at fair value from
fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations. The carrying value of
unsecured short-term borrowings that are not recorded at fair value generally
approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of the obligations. As
these unsecured short-term borrowings are not accounted for at fair value,
they are not included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy in Notes 4 through
10. Had these borrowings been included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy,
substantially all would have been classified in level 2 as of both December
2021 and December 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents information about unsecured short-term borrowings.

In the table above:

The weighted average interest rates for these borrowings include the effect of
hedging activities and exclude unsecured short-term borrowings accounted for
at fair value under the fair value option. See Note 7 for further information
about hedging activities.  

Unsecured Long-Term Borrowings

The table below presents information about unsecured long-term borrowings.

In the table above:

Unsecured long-term borrowings consists principally

of

senior borrowings, which have maturities extending through 2065

Floating-rate obligations includes equity-linked, credit-linked and indexed
instruments. Floating interest rates are generally based on USD LIBOR, Euro
Interbank Offered Rate or SOFR.  

The table below presents unsecured long-term borrowings by maturity.

In the table above:

Unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the financial
statement date and unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable within
one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder are
excluded as they are included in unsecured short-term borrowings.  

Unsecured long-term borrowings that are repayable prior to maturity at the
option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.  

Unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the holder are reflected at the earliest dates such options become
exercisable.  

The firm designates certain derivatives as fair value hedges to convert a
portion of fixed-rate unsecured long-term borrowings not accounted for at fair
value into floating-rate obligations. See Note 7 for further information about
hedging activities.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents unsecured long-term borrowings, after giving effect
to such hedging activities.

In the table above, the aggregate amounts of unsecured long-term borrowings
had weighted average interest rates of 1.60% (2.25% related to fixed-rate
obligations and 1.48% related to floating-rate obligations) as of December
2021 and 2.01% (3.34% related to fixed-rate obligations and 1.70% related to
floating-rate obligations) as of December 2020. These rates exclude unsecured
long-term borrowings accounted for at fair value under the fair value option.

The carrying value of unsecured long-term borrowings for which the firm did
not elect the fair value option was $201.70 billion as of December 2021 and
$172.57 billion as of December 2020. The estimated fair value of such
unsecured long-term borrowings was $209.37 billion as of December 2021 and
$183.29 billion as of December 2020. As these borrowings are not accounted for
at fair value, they are not included in the firm’s fair value hierarchy in
Notes 4 through 10. Had these borrowings been included in the firm’s fair
value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level 2 as of
both December 2021 and December 2020.

Subordinated Borrowings

Unsecured long-term borrowings includes subordinated debt and junior
subordinated debt. Subordinated debt that matures within one year is included
in unsecured short-term borrowings. Junior subordinated debt is junior in
right of payment to other subordinated borrowings, which are junior to senior
borrowings. Long-term subordinated debt had maturities ranging from 2025 to
2045 as of both December 2021 and December 2020.

The table below presents information about subordinated borrowings.

In the table above:

The rate is the weighted average interest rate for these borrowings (excluding
borrowings accounted for at fair value under the fair value option), including
the effect of fair value hedges used to convert fixed-rate obligations into
floating-rate obligations. See Note 7 for further information about hedging
activities.  

Junior Subordinated Debt

In 2004, Group Inc. issued $2.84 billion of junior subordinated debt to
Goldman Sachs Capital I (Trust), a Delaware statutory trust. The Trust issued
$2.75 billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial interests (Trust Preferred
securities) to third parties and $85 million of common beneficial interests to
Group Inc. As of both December 2021 and December 2020, the outstanding par
amount of junior subordinated debt held by the Trust was $968 million and the
outstanding par amount of Trust Preferred securities and common beneficial
interests issued by the Trust was $939 million and $29 million, respectively.
The Trust is a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of the firm for regulatory and
legal purposes but is not consolidated for accounting purposes.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The firm pays interest semi-annually on the junior subordinated debt at an
annual rate of 6.345% and the debt matures on February 15, 2034. The coupon
rate and the payment dates applicable to the beneficial interests are the same
as the interest rate and payment dates for the junior subordinated debt. The
firm has the right, from time to time, to defer payment of interest on the
junior subordinated debt, and therefore cause payment on the Trust’s preferred
beneficial interests to be deferred, in each case up to ten consecutive semi-
annual periods. During any such deferral period, the firm will not be
permitted to, among other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases
of its common stock. The Trust is not permitted to pay any distributions on
the common beneficial interests held by Group Inc. unless all dividends
payable on the preferred beneficial interests have been paid in full.

The firm has covenanted in favor of the holders of Group Inc.’s 6.345% junior
subordinated debt due February 15, 2034, that, subject to certain exceptions,
the firm will not redeem or purchase the capital securities issued by Goldman
Sachs Capital II and Goldman Sachs Capital III (APEX Trusts) or shares of
Group Inc.’s Perpetual

Non-Cumulative

Preferred Stock, Series E (Series E Preferred Stock), Perpetual

Non-Cumulative

Preferred Stock, Series F (Series F Preferred Stock) or Perpetual

Non-Cumulative

Preferred Stock, Series O, if the redemption or purchase results in less than
$253 million aggregate liquidation preference of that series outstanding,
prior to specified dates in 2022 for a price that exceeds a maximum amount
determined by reference to the net cash proceeds that the firm has received
from the sale of qualifying securities.

The APEX Trusts hold Group Inc.’s Series E Preferred Stock and Series F
Preferred Stock. These trusts are Delaware statutory trusts sponsored by the
firm and wholly-owned finance subsidiaries of the firm for regulatory and
legal purposes but are not consolidated for accounting purposes.

Note 15.

Other Liabilities

The table below presents other liabilities by type.

Operating Lease Liabilities

For leases longer than one year, the firm recognizes a

right-of-use

asset representing the right to use the underlying asset for the lease term,
and a lease liability representing the liability to make payments. See Note 12
for information about operating lease

right-of-use

assets.

The table below presents information about operating lease liabilities.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above, the weighted average discount rate represents the firm’s
incremental borrowing rate as of January 2019 for operating leases existing on
the date of adoption of ASU

No. 2016-02,

“Leases (Topic 842),” and at the lease inception date for leases entered into
subsequent to the adoption of this ASU.

Operating lease costs were $463 million for 2021, $458 million for 2020 and
$538 million for 2019. Variable lease costs, which are included in operating
lease costs, were not material for 2021, 2020 and 2019. Total occupancy
expenses for space held in excess of the firm’s current requirements were not
material for both 2021 and 2020.

Lease payments relating to operating lease arrangements that were signed, but
had not yet commenced were $300 million as of December 2021.

Accrued Expenses and Other

Accrued expenses and other included:

Liabilities classified as held for sale of $310 million as of December 2021
related to certain of the firm’s consolidated investments within the Asset
Management segment, substantially all of which consisted of other secured
financings primarily carried at fair value under the fair value option, and
were related to assets classified as held for sale. See Note 12 for further
information about assets held for sale. As of December 2020, liabilities
classified as held for sale were not material.  

Contract liabilities, which represent consideration received by the firm in
connection with its contracts with clients prior to providing the service. As
of both December 2021 and December 2020, the firm’s contract liabilities were
not material.  

Note 16.

Securitization Activities

The firm securitizes residential and commercial mortgages, corporate bonds,
loans and other types of financial assets by selling these assets to
securitization vehicles (e.g., trusts, corporate entities and limited
liability companies) or through a resecuritization. The firm acts as
underwriter of the beneficial interests that are sold to investors. The firm’s
residential mortgage securitizations are primarily in connection with
government agency securitizations.

The firm accounts for a securitization as a sale when it has relinquished
control over the transferred financial assets. Prior to securitization, the
firm generally accounts for assets pending transfer at fair value and
therefore does not typically recognize significant gains or losses upon the
transfer of assets. Net revenues from underwriting activities are recognized
in connection with the sales of the underlying beneficial interests to
investors.

The firm generally receives cash in exchange for the transferred assets but
may also have continuing involvement with the transferred financial assets,
including ownership of beneficial interests in securitized financial assets,
primarily in the form of debt instruments. The firm may also purchase senior
or subordinated securities issued by securitization vehicles (which are
typically VIEs) in connection with secondary market-making activities.

The primary risks included in beneficial interests and other interests from
the firm’s continuing involvement with securitization vehicles are the
performance of the underlying collateral, the position of the firm’s
investment in the capital structure of the securitization vehicle and the
market yield for the security. Interests accounted for at fair value are
primarily classified in level 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Interests not
accounted for at fair value are carried at amounts that approximate fair
value. See Notes 4 through 10 for further information about fair value
measurements.

The table below presents the amount of financial assets securitized and the
cash flows received on retained interests in securitization entities in which
the firm had continuing involvement as of the end of the period.

The firm securitized assets of $886 million for 2021, $551 million for 2020
and $601 million for 2019, in a

non-cash

exchange for loans and investments.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents information about nonconsolidated securitization
entities to which the firm sold assets and had continuing involvement as of
the end of the period.

In the table above:

CMOs represents collateralized mortgage obligations.  

The outstanding principal amount is presented for the purpose of providing
information about the size of the securitization entities and is not
representative of the firm’s risk of loss.  

The firm’s risk of loss from retained or purchased interests is limited to the
carrying value of these interests.  

Purchased interests represent senior and subordinated interests, purchased in
connection with secondary market-making activities, in securitization entities
in which the firm also holds retained interests.  

Substantially all of the total outstanding principal amount and total retained
interests relate to securitizations during 2017 and thereafter.  

In addition to the interests in the table above, the firm had other continuing
involvement in the form of derivative transactions and commitments with
certain nonconsolidated VIEs. The carrying value of these derivatives and
commitments was a net asset of $81 million as of December 2021 and $52 million
as of December 2020, and the notional amount of these derivatives and
commitments was $1.81 billion as of December 2021 and $1.43 billion as of
December 2020. The notional amounts of these derivatives and commitments are
included in maximum exposure to loss in the nonconsolidated VIE table in Note

The table below presents information about the weighted average key economic
assumptions used in measuring the fair value of mortgage-backed retained
interests.

In the table above:

Amounts do not reflect the benefit of other financial instruments that are
held to mitigate risks inherent in these retained interests.  

Changes in fair value based on an adverse variation in assumptions generally
cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in assumptions
to the change in fair value is not usually linear.  

The impact of a change in a particular assumption is calculated independently
of changes in any other assumption. In practice, simultaneous changes in
assumptions might magnify or counteract the sensitivities disclosed above.  

The constant prepayment rate is included only for positions for which it is a
key assumption in the determination of fair value.  

The discount rate for retained interests that relate to U.S. government
agency-issued CMOs does not include any credit loss. Expected credit loss
assumptions are reflected in the discount rate for the remainder of retained
interests.  

The firm has other retained interests not reflected in the table above with a
fair value of $360 million and a weighted average life of 3.6 years as of
December 2021, and a fair value of $192 million and a weighted average life of
3.9 years as of December 2020. Due to the nature and fair value of certain of
these retained interests, the weighted average assumptions for constant
prepayment and discount rates and the related sensitivity to adverse changes
are not meaningful as of both December 2021 and December 2020. The firm’s
maximum exposure to adverse changes in the value of these interests is the
carrying value of $360 million as of December 2021 and $192 million as of
December 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 17.

Variable Interest Entities

A variable interest in a VIE is an investment (e.g., debt or equity) or other
interest (e.g., derivatives or loans and lending commitments) that will absorb
portions of the VIE’s expected losses and/or receive portions of the VIE’s
expected residual returns.

The firm’s variable interests in VIEs include senior and subordinated debt;
loans and lending commitments; limited and general partnership interests;
preferred and common equity; derivatives that may include foreign currency,
equity and/or credit risk; guarantees; and certain of the fees the firm
receives from investment funds. Certain interest rate, foreign currency and
credit derivatives the firm enters into with VIEs are not variable interests
because they create, rather than absorb, risk.

VIEs generally finance the purchase of assets by issuing debt and equity
securities that are either collateralized by or indexed to the assets held by
the VIE. The debt and equity securities issued by a VIE may include tranches
of varying levels of subordination. The firm’s involvement with VIEs includes
securitization of financial assets, as described in Note 16, and investments
in and loans to other types of VIEs, as described below. See Note 3 for the
firm’s consolidation policies, including the definition of a VIE.

VIE Consolidation Analysis

The enterprise with a controlling financial interest in a VIE is known as the
primary beneficiary and consolidates the VIE. The firm determines whether it
is the primary beneficiary of a VIE by performing an analysis that principally
considers:

Which variable interest holder has the power to direct the activities of the
VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance;  

Which variable interest holder has the obligation to absorb losses or the
right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant
to the VIE;  

The VIE’s purpose and design, including the risks the VIE was designed to
create and pass through to its variable interest holders;  

The VIE’s capital structure;  

The terms between the VIE and its variable interest holders and other parties
involved with the VIE; and  

Related-party relationships.  

The firm reassesses its evaluation of whether an entity is a VIE when certain
reconsideration events occur. The firm reassesses its determination of whether
it is the primary beneficiary of a VIE on an ongoing basis based on current
facts and circumstances.

VIE Activities

The firm is principally involved with VIEs through the following business
activities:

Mortgage-Backed VIEs.

The firm sells residential and commercial mortgage loans and securities to
mortgage-backed VIEs and may retain beneficial interests in the assets sold to
these VIEs. The firm purchases and sells beneficial interests issued by
mortgage-backed VIEs in connection with market-making activities. In addition,
the firm may enter into derivatives with certain of these VIEs, primarily
interest rate swaps, which are typically not variable interests. The firm
generally enters into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate its
risk.

Real Estate, Credit- and Power-Related and Other Investing VIEs.

The firm purchases equity and debt securities issued by and makes loans to
VIEs that hold real estate, performing and nonperforming debt, distressed
loans, power-related assets and equity securities. The firm generally does not
sell assets to, or enter into derivatives with, these VIEs.

Corporate Debt and Other Asset-Backed VIEs.

The firm structures VIEs that issue notes to clients, purchases and sells
beneficial interests issued by corporate debt and other asset-backed VIEs in
connection with market-making activities, and makes loans to VIEs that
warehouse corporate debt. Certain of these VIEs synthetically create the
exposure for the beneficial interests they issue by entering into credit
derivatives with the firm, rather than purchasing the underlying assets. In
addition, the firm may enter into derivatives, such as total return swaps,
with certain corporate debt and other asset-backed VIEs, under which the firm
pays the VIE a return due to the beneficial interest holders and receives the
return on the collateral owned by the VIE. The collateral owned by these VIEs
is primarily other asset-backed loans and securities. The firm may be removed
as the total return swap counterparty and may enter into derivatives with
other counterparties to mitigate its risk related to these swaps. The firm may
sell assets to the corporate debt and other asset-backed VIEs it structures.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Principal-Protected Note VIEs.

The firm structures VIEs that issue principal-protected notes to clients.
These VIEs own portfolios of assets, principally with exposure to hedge funds.
Substantially all of the principal protection on the notes issued by these
VIEs is provided by the asset portfolio rebalancing that is required under the
terms of the notes. The firm enters into total return swaps with these VIEs
under which the firm pays the VIE the return due to the principal-protected
note holders and receives the return on the assets owned by the VIE. The firm
may enter into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate its risk. The
firm also obtains funding through these VIEs.

Investments in Funds.

The firm makes equity investments in certain investment fund VIEs it manages
and is entitled to receive fees from these VIEs. The firm has generally not
sold assets to, or entered into derivatives with, these VIEs.

Nonconsolidated VIEs

The table below presents a summary of the nonconsolidated VIEs in which the
firm holds variable interests.

In the table above:

The nature of the firm’s variable interests is described in the rows under
maximum exposure to loss.  

The firm’s exposure to the obligations of VIEs is generally limited to its
interests in these entities. In certain instances, the firm provides
guarantees, including derivative guarantees, to VIEs or holders of variable
interests in VIEs.  

The maximum exposure to loss excludes the benefit of offsetting financial
instruments that are held to mitigate the risks associated with these variable
interests.  

The maximum exposure to loss from retained interests, purchased interests, and
debt and equity is the carrying value of these interests.  

The maximum exposure to loss from commitments and guarantees, and derivatives
is the notional amount, which does not represent anticipated losses and has
not been reduced by unrealized losses. As a result, the maximum exposure to
loss exceeds liabilities recorded for commitments and guarantees, and
derivatives.  

The table below presents information, by principal business activity, for
nonconsolidated VIEs included in the summary table above.

As of both December 2021 and December 2020, the carrying values of the firm’s
variable interests in nonconsolidated VIEs are included in the consolidated
balance sheets as follows:

Mortgage-backed: Assets primarily included in trading assets and loans.  

Real estate, credit- and power-related and other investing: Assets primarily
included in investments and loans, and liabilities included in trading
liabilities and other liabilities.  

Corporate debt and other asset-backed: Assets included in loans and trading
assets, and liabilities included in trading liabilities.  

Investments in funds: Assets included in investments.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Consolidated VIEs

The table below presents a summary of the carrying value and balance sheet
classification of assets and liabilities in consolidated VIEs.

In the table above:

Assets and liabilities are presented net of intercompany eliminations and
exclude the benefit of offsetting financial instruments that are held to
mitigate the risks associated with the firm’s variable interests.  

VIEs in which the firm holds a majority voting interest are excluded if (i)
the VIE meets the definition of a business and (ii) the VIE’s assets can be
used for purposes other than the settlement of its obligations.  

Substantially all assets can only be used to settle obligations of the VIE.  

The table below presents information, by principal business activity, for
consolidated VIEs included in the summary table above.

In the table above:

The majority of the assets in principal-protected notes VIEs are intercompany
and are eliminated in consolidation.  

Creditors and beneficial interest holders of real estate, credit-related and
other investing VIEs do not have recourse to the general credit of the firm.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 18.

Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees

Commitments

The table below presents commitments by type.

The table below presents commitments by expiration.

In the tables above, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, the firm’s
commitments under letters of credit, issued by various banks which the firm
provides to counterparties to satisfy certain collateral and margin deposit
requirements, is included in other commitments. Previously, such letters of
credit were disclosed as a separate line item in the tables above. Previously
reported amounts have been conformed to the current presentation.

Lending Commitments

The firm’s commercial and warehouse financing lending commitments are
agreements to lend with fixed termination dates and depend on the satisfaction
of all contractual conditions to borrowing. These commitments are presented
net of amounts syndicated to third parties. The total commitment amount does
not necessarily reflect actual future cash flows because the firm may
syndicate portions of these commitments. In addition, commitments can expire
unused or be reduced or cancelled at the counterparty’s request. The firm also
provides credit to consumers by issuing credit card lines.

The table below presents information about lending commitments.

In the table above:

Held for sale lending commitments are accounted for at the lower of cost or
fair value. The carrying value of lending commitments held for sale was a
liability of $91 million as of December 2021 and $68 million as of December
2020. The estimated fair value of such lending commitments approximates the
carrying value. Had these lending commitments been included in the fair value
hierarchy, they would have been primarily classified in level 3 as of both
December 2021 and December 2020.  

Gains or losses related to lending commitments at fair value, if any, are
generally recorded net of any fees in other principal transactions.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Commercial Lending.

The firm’s commercial lending commitments were primarily extended to
investment-grade corporate borrowers. Such commitments primarily included
$120.99 billion as of December 2021 and $110.31 billion as of December 2020,
related to relationship lending activities (principally used for operating and
general corporate purposes) and $21.07 billion as of December 2021 and $15.81
billion as of December 2020, related to other investment banking activities
(generally extended for contingent acquisition financing and are often
intended to be short-term in nature, as borrowers often seek to replace them
with other funding sources). The firm also extends lending commitments in
connection with other types of corporate lending, as well as commercial real
estate financing. See Note 9 for further information about funded loans.

To mitigate the credit risk associated with the firm’s commercial lending
activities, the firm obtains credit protection on certain loans and lending
commitments through credit default swaps, both single-name and index-based
contracts, and through the issuance of credit-linked notes.

Warehouse Financing.

The firm provides financing to clients who warehouse financial assets. These
arrangements are secured by the warehoused assets, primarily consisting of
residential real estate, consumer and corporate loans.

Credit Cards.

The firm’s credit card lending commitments included $33.97 billion as of
December 2021 and $21.64 billion as of December 2020 related to credit card
lines issued by the firm to consumers. These credit card lines are cancellable
by the firm. Credit card commitments also includes approximately $2.0 billion
relating to the firm’s commitment to acquire a credit card portfolio in
connection with its agreement, in January 2021, to form a

co-branded

credit card relationship with General Motors. This acquisition was completed
in February 2022.

Risk Participations

The firm also risk participates certain of its commercial lending commitments
to other financial institutions. In the event of a risk participant’s default,
the firm will be responsible to fund the borrower.

Collateralized Agreement Commitments/Collateralized Financing Commitments

Collateralized agreement commitments includes forward starting resale and
securities borrowing agreements, and collateralized financing commitments
includes forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements that
settle at a future date, generally within three business days. Collateralized
agreement commitments also includes transactions where the firm has entered
into commitments to provide contingent financing to its clients and
counterparties through resale agreements. The firm’s funding of these
commitments depends on the satisfaction of all contractual conditions to the
resale agreement and these commitments can expire unused.

Investment Commitments

Investment commitments includes commitments to invest in private equity, real
estate and other assets directly and through funds that the firm raises and
manages. Investment commitments included $1.60 billion as of December 2021 and
$1.69 billion as of December 2020, related to commitments to invest in funds
managed by the firm. If these commitments are called, they would be funded at
market value on the date of investment.

Investment commitments also included approximately $1.90 billion as of
December 2021 related to the firm’s commitment to acquire NN Investment
Partners, a leading European asset manager with approximately $320

billion in assets under supervision, in an

all-cash

transaction. This acquisition is expected to close in the second quarter of
2022. In addition, investment commitments included approximately $2.0

billion as of December 2021 related to the firm’s commitment to acquire
GreenSky, Inc. (GreenSky), a leading technology company facilitating point-of-
sale financing for merchants and consumers. This acquisition is expected to
close

in

the first quarter of 2022. The GreenSky acquisition will be an

all-stock

transaction in which stockholders of GreenSky and unit holders of GreenSky
Holdings, LLC (GreenSky Holdings) will receive 0.03

shares of the firm’s common stock for each share of GreenSky Class A common
stock and each GreenSky Holdings common unit. The investment commitment in the
table above represents the purchase price of the acquisition based on the
stock price of Group Inc. as of December 2021. However, the final purchase
price of the acquisition will depend upon the stock price of Group Inc. at the
time of the closing of the transaction. In connection with this transaction,
the firm provided a commitment to acquire up to

$800 million of loans originated by GreenSky’s bank partners, and, as of
December 2021, had acquired approximately $200 million of loans under this
commitment. The remaining commitment of approximately $600

million is included in other commitments in the table above. In the event that
the acquisition is not completed, the firm has agreed to provide a commitment
to purchase up to an additional $1.0 billion of loans originated by GreenSky’s
bank partners. This commitment is not included in the table above.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Contingencies

Legal Proceedings.

See Note 27 for information about legal proceedings.

Guarantees

The table below presents derivatives that meet the definition of a guarantee,
securities lending and clearing guarantees and certain other financial
guarantees.

In the table above:

The maximum payout is based on the notional amount of the contract and does
not represent anticipated losses.  

Amounts exclude certain commitments to issue standby letters of credit that
are included in lending commitments. See the tables in “Commitments” above for
a summary of the firm’s commitments.  

Derivative Guarantees.

The firm enters into various derivatives that meet the definition of a
guarantee under U.S. GAAP, including written equity and commodity put options,
written currency contracts and interest rate caps, floors and swaptions. These
derivatives are risk managed together with derivatives that do not meet the
definition of a guarantee, and therefore the amounts in the table above do not
reflect the firm’s overall risk related to derivative activities. Disclosures
about derivatives are not required if they may be cash settled and the firm
has no basis to conclude it is probable that the counterparties held the
underlying instruments at inception of the contract. The firm has concluded
that these conditions have been met for certain large, internationally active
commercial and investment bank counterparties, central clearing
counterparties, hedge funds and certain other counterparties.

Accordingly, the firm has not included such contracts in the table above. See
Note 7 for information about credit derivatives that meet the definition of a
guarantee, which are not included in the table above.

Derivatives are accounted for at fair value and therefore the carrying value
is considered the best indication of payment/performance risk for individual
contracts. However, the carrying values in the table above exclude the effect
of counterparty and cash collateral netting.

Securities Lending and Clearing Guarantees.

Securities lending and clearing guarantees include the indemnifications and
guarantees that the firm provides in its capacity as an agency lender and in
its capacity as a sponsoring member of the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation.

As an agency lender, the firm indemnifies most of its securities lending
customers against losses incurred in the event that borrowers do not return
securities and the collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value
of the securities borrowed. The maximum payout of such indemnifications was
$11.05 billion as of December 2021 and $19.86 billion as of December 2020.
Collateral held by the lenders in connection with securities lending
indemnifications was $11.36 billion as of December 2021 and $20.39 billion as
of December 2020. Because the contractual nature of these arrangements
requires the firm to obtain collateral with a market value that exceeds the
value of the securities lent to the borrower, there is minimal performance
risk associated with these indemnifications.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

As a sponsoring member of the Government Securities Division of the Fixed
Income Clearing Corporation, the firm guarantees the performance of its
sponsored member clients to the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation in
connection with certain resale and repurchase agreements. To minimize
potential losses on such guarantees, the firm obtains a security interest in
the collateral that the sponsored client placed with the Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation. Therefore, the risk of loss on such guarantees is minimal. There
were no amounts outstanding under the guarantee as of December 2021. As of
December 2020, the maximum payout on this guarantee was $1.49 billion and the
related collateral held was $1.50 billion.

Other Financial Guarantees.

In the ordinary course of business, the firm provides other financial
guarantees of the obligations of third parties (e.g., standby letters of
credit and other guarantees to enable clients to complete transactions and
fund-related guarantees). These guarantees represent obligations to make
payments to beneficiaries if the guaranteed party fails to fulfill its
obligation under a contractual arrangement with that beneficiary. Other
financial guarantees also include a guarantee that the firm has provided to
the Government of Malaysia that it will receive at least $1.4 billion in
assets and proceeds from assets seized by governmental authorities around the
world related to 1Malaysia Development Berhad, a sovereign wealth fund in
Malaysia (1MDB). The firm evaluates progress toward satisfying this obligation
based on the report that it receives on a semi-annual basis, expected in
February and August. Based on the latest report as of August 2021,
approximately $450 million in assets or proceeds from assets has been returned
to the Government of Malaysia in connection with this guarantee, which must be
satisfied by August 18, 2025. Any amounts paid by the firm under this
guarantee would be subject to reimbursement in the event the assets or
proceeds received by the Government of Malaysia through August 18, 2028
exceeds $1.4 billion. See Note 27 for further information about matters
related to 1MDB.

Guarantees of Securities Issued by Trusts.

The firm has established trusts, including Goldman Sachs Capital I, the APEX
Trusts and other entities, for the limited purpose of issuing securities to
third parties, lending the proceeds to the firm and entering into contractual
arrangements with the firm and third parties related to this purpose. The firm
does not consolidate these entities. See Note 14 for further information about
the transactions involving Goldman Sachs Capital I and the APEX Trusts.

The firm effectively provides for the full and unconditional guarantee of the
securities issued by these entities. Timely payment by the firm of amounts due
to these entities under the guarantee, borrowing, preferred stock and related
contractual arrangements will be sufficient to cover payments due on the
securities issued by these entities. No subsidiary of Group Inc. guarantees
the securities of Goldman Sachs Capital I or the APEX Trusts.

Management believes that it is unlikely that any circumstances will occur,
such as nonperformance on the part of paying agents or other service
providers, that would make it necessary for the firm to make payments related
to these entities other than those required under the terms of the guarantee,
borrowing, preferred stock and related contractual arrangements and in
connection with certain expenses incurred by these entities.

Indemnities and Guarantees of Service Providers.

In the ordinary course of business, the firm indemnifies and guarantees
certain service providers, such as clearing and custody agents, trustees and
administrators, against specified potential losses in connection with their
acting as an agent of, or providing services to, the firm or its affiliates.

The firm may also be liable to some clients or other parties for losses
arising from its custodial role or caused by acts or omissions of third-party
service providers, including

sub-custodians

and third-party brokers. In certain cases, the firm has the right to seek
indemnification from these third-party service providers for certain relevant
losses incurred by the firm. In addition, the firm is a member of payment,
clearing and settlement networks, as well as securities exchanges around the
world that may require the firm to meet the obligations of such networks and
exchanges in the event of member defaults and other loss scenarios.

In connection with the firm’s prime brokerage and clearing businesses, the
firm agrees to clear and settle on behalf of its clients the transactions
entered into by them with other brokerage firms. The firm’s obligations in
respect of such transactions are secured by the assets in the client’s
account, as well as any proceeds received from the transactions cleared and
settled by the firm on behalf of the client. In connection with joint venture
investments, the firm may issue loan guarantees under which it may be liable
in the event of fraud, misappropriation, environmental liabilities and certain
other matters involving the borrower.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these
guarantees and indemnifications. However, management believes that it is
unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under these
arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these guarantees and
indemnifications have been recognized in the consolidated balance sheets as of
both December 2021 and December 2020.

Other Representations, Warranties and Indemnifications.

The firm provides representations and warranties to counterparties in
connection with a variety of commercial transactions and occasionally
indemnifies them against potential losses caused by the breach of those
representations and warranties. The firm may also provide indemnifications
protecting against changes in or adverse application of certain U.S. tax laws
in connection with ordinary-course transactions, such as securities issuances,
borrowings or derivatives.

In addition, the firm may provide indemnifications to some counterparties to
protect them in the event additional taxes are owed or payments are withheld,
due either to a change in or an adverse application of certain

non-U.S.

tax laws.

These indemnifications generally are standard contractual terms and are
entered into in the ordinary course of business. Generally, there are no
stated or notional amounts included in these indemnifications, and the
contingencies triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to
occur. The firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under
these guarantees and indemnifications. However, management believes that it is
unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under these
arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these arrangements have
been recognized in the consolidated balance sheets as of both December 2021
and December 2020.

Guarantees of Subsidiaries.

Group Inc. is the entity that fully and unconditionally guarantees the
securities issued by GS Finance Corp., a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of
the firm. Group Inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of Goldman Sachs &
Co. LLC (GS&Co.), GS Bank USA and Goldman Sachs Paris Inc. et Cie, subject to
certain exceptions. In addition, Group Inc. has provided guarantees to Goldman
Sachs International (GSI) and Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE (GSBE) related to
agreements that each entity has entered into with certain of its
counterparties. Furthermore, Group Inc. provided a guarantee to GS Bank USA in
2020 related to securities that GS Bank USA acquired from certain affiliated
funds of Group Inc. and loans and lending commitments that GS Bank USA
acquired from certain subsidiaries of Group Inc. As of December 2021, none of
the securities acquired from the affiliated funds were outstanding.

Group Inc. guarantees many of the obligations of its other consolidated
subsidiaries on a

transaction-by-transaction

basis, as negotiated with counterparties. Group Inc. is unable to develop an
estimate of the maximum payout under its subsidiary guarantees. However,
because these obligations are also obligations of consolidated subsidiaries,
Group Inc.’s liabilities as guarantor are not separately disclosed.

Note 19.

Shareholders’ Equity

Common Equity

As of both December 2021 and December 2020, the firm had 4.00 billion
authorized shares of common stock and 200 million authorized shares of
nonvoting common stock, each with a par value of $0.01 per share.

The firm’s share repurchase program is intended to help maintain the
appropriate level of common equity. The share repurchase program is effected
primarily through regular open-market purchases (which may include repurchase
plans designed to comply with

Rule 10b5-1

and accelerated share repurchases), the amounts and timing of which are
determined primarily by the firm’s current and projected capital position, and
capital deployment opportunities, but which may also be influenced by general
market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of the firm’s
common stock. The firm suspended stock repurchases during the first quarter of
2020 and, consistent with the FRB’s requirement for all large bank holding
companies (BHCs), extended the suspension of stock repurchases through the
fourth quarter of 2020. The firm resumed stock repurchases in the first
quarter of 2021.

The table below presents information about common stock repurchases.

Pursuant to the terms of certain share-based compensation plans, employees may
remit shares to the firm or the firm may cancel share-based awards to satisfy
statutory employee tax withholding requirements. Under these plans, 1,830
shares in 2021, 3,476 shares in 2020 and 7,490 shares in 2019 were remitted
with a total value of $0.5 million in 2021, $0.9 million in 2020 and $2
million in 2019, and the firm cancelled 3.4 million share-based awards in
2021, 3.4 million in 2020 and 3.8 million in 2019 with a total value of $984
million in 2021, $829 million in 2020 and $743 million in 2019.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents common stock dividends declared.

On

January 14, 2022

, the Board of Directors of Group Inc. (Board) declared a dividend of $

per common share to be paid on

March 30, 2022

to common shareholders of record on

March 2, 2022.

Preferred Equity

The tables below present information about the perpetual preferred stock
issued and outstanding as of December 2021.

In the tables above:

All shares have a par value of $0.01 per share and, where applicable, each
share is represented by the specified number of depositary shares.  

The earliest redemption date represents the date on which each share of

non-cumulative

preferred stock is redeemable at the firm’s option.  

Prior to redeeming preferred stock, the firm must receive approval from the
FRB.  

The redemption price per share for Series A through F and Series Q through V
Preferred Stock is the liquidation preference plus declared and unpaid
dividends. The redemption price per share for Series J through P Preferred
Stock is the liquidation preference plus accrued and unpaid dividends. Each
share of Series E and Series F Preferred Stock is redeemable at the firm’s
option, subject to certain covenant restrictions governing the firm’s ability
to redeem the preferred stock without issuing common stock or other
instruments with equity-like characteristics. See Note 14 for information
about the replacement capital covenants applicable to the Series E and Series
F Preferred Stock.  

All series of preferred stock are pari passu and have a preference over the
firm’s common stock on liquidation.  

The firm’s ability to declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire, its common stock is subject to certain restrictions in the
event that the firm fails to pay or set aside full dividends on the preferred
stock for the latest completed dividend period.  

In 2021, the firm

redeemed

all outstanding shares of its (i) Series N 6.30%

Non-Cumulative

Preferred Stock with a redemption value of $675 million ($25,000 per share),
plus accrued and unpaid dividends and its (ii) Series M 5.375%

Fixed-to-Floating

Rate

Non-Cumulative

Preferred Stock with a redemption value of $2 billion ($25,000 per share),
plus accrued and unpaid dividends. The difference between the redemption value
and net carrying value at the time of these redemptions was $41 million, which
was recorded as an addition to preferred stock dividends in 2021.

In 2020, the firm redeemed the remaining 14,000 outstanding shares of its
Series L 5.70%

Non-Cumulative

Preferred Stock with a redemption value of $350 million ($25,000 per share),
plus accrued and unpaid dividends. The difference between the redemption value
and net carrying value was $1 million, which was recorded as an addition to
preferred stock dividends in 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents the dividend rates of perpetual preferred stock as of
December 2021.

In the table above, dividends on each series of preferred stock are payable in
arrears for the periods specified.

The table below presents preferred stock dividends declared.

On January 6, 2022, Group Inc. declared dividends of $239.58 per share of
Series A Preferred Stock, $255.56 per share of Series C Preferred Stock,
$255.56 per share of Series D Preferred Stock, $343.75 per share of Series J
Preferred Stock, $398.44 per share of Series K Preferred Stock, $687.50 per
share of Series Q Preferred Stock, $618.75 per share of Series R Preferred
Stock, $550.00 per share of Series S Preferred Stock and $486.67 per share of
Series U Preferred Stock to be paid on February 10, 2022 to preferred
shareholders of record on January 26, 2022. In addition, the firm declared
dividends of $1,000.00 per share of Series E Preferred Stock and $1,000.00 per
share of Series F Preferred Stock to be paid on March 1, 2022 to preferred
shareholders of record on February 14, 2022.

Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss)

The table below presents changes in accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss), net of tax, by type.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 20.

Regulation and Capital Adequacy

The FRB is the primary regulator of Group Inc., a BHC under the U.S. Bank
Holding Company Act of 1956 and a financial holding company under amendments
to this Act. The firm is subject to consolidated regulatory capital
requirements which are calculated in accordance with the regulations of the
FRB (Capital Framework).

The capital requirements are expressed as risk-based capital and leverage
ratios that compare measures of regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
(RWAs), average assets and

off-balance

sheet exposures. Failure to comply with these capital requirements would
result in restrictions being imposed by the firm’s regulators and could limit
the firm’s ability to repurchase shares, pay dividends and make certain
discretionary compensation payments. The firm’s capital levels are also
subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components of
capital, risk weightings and other factors. Furthermore, certain of the firm’s
subsidiaries are subject to separate regulations and capital requirements.

Capital Framework

The regulations under the Capital Framework are largely based on the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision’s (Basel Committee) capital framework for
strengthening international capital standards (Basel III) and also implement
certain provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. Under the Capital Framework, the
firm is an “Advanced approach” banking organization and has been designated as
a global systemically important bank

(G-SIB).

The Capital Framework includes the minimum risk-based capital and the capital
conservation buffer requirements. The buffer must consist entirely of capital
that qualifies as Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital.

The firm calculates its CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and Total capital ratios
in accordance with both the Standardized and Advanced Capital Rules. Each of
the ratios calculated under the Standardized and Advanced Capital Rules must
meet its respective capital requirements.

Under the Capital Framework, the firm is also subject to leverage requirements
which consist of a minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio and a minimum supplementary
leverage ratio (SLR), as well as the SLR buffer.

Consolidated Regulatory Capital Requirements

Risk-Based Capital Ratios.

The table below presents the risk-based capital requirements.

In the table above:

As of both December 2021 and December 2020, under both the Standardized and
Advanced Capital Rules, the CET1 capital ratio requirement includes a minimum
of 4.5%, the Tier 1 capital ratio requirement includes a minimum of 6.0% and
the Total capital ratio requirement includes a minimum of 8.0%. These
requirements also include the capital conservation buffer requirements,
consisting of the

G-SIB

surcharge of 2.5% (Method 2) and the countercyclical capital buffer, which the
FRB has set to zero percent. In addition, the capital conservation buffer
requirements include the stress capital buffer (SCB) of 6.4% as of December
2021 and 6.6% as of December 2020 under the Standardized Capital Rules and a
buffer of 2.5% as of both December 2021 and December 2020 under the Advanced
Capital Rules.  

The

G-SIB

surcharge is updated annually based on financial data from the prior year and
is generally applicable for the following year. The

G-SIB

surcharge is calculated using two methodologies, the higher of which is
reflected in the firm’s risk-based capital requirements. The first calculation
(Method 1) is based on the Basel Committee’s methodology which, among other
factors, relies upon measures of the size, activity and complexity of each

G-SIB.

The second calculation (Method 2) uses similar inputs but includes a measure
of reliance on short-term wholesale funding.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents information about risk-based capital ratios.

In the table above,

As permitted by the FRB, the firm elected to temporarily delay the estimated
effects of adopting CECL on regulatory capital until January 2022 and to
subsequently

phase

in

the effects through January 2025. In addition, the firm elected to increase
regulatory capital by 25% of the increase in the allowance for credit losses
since January 1, 2020, as permitted by the rules issued by the FRB. The impact
of this increase will also be phased in over the three-year transition period.
Reflecting the full impact of CECL as of both December 2021 and December 2020
would not have had a material impact on the firm’s capital ratios.  

In the third quarter of 2021, based on regulatory feedback, the firm revised
certain interpretations of the Capital Rules underlying the calculation of
Standardized RWAs. As of December 2020, this change would have increased the
firm’s Standardized RWAs of $554 billion by approximately $23 billion, which
would have reduced the firm’s Standardized CET1 capital ratio of 14.7% by 0.6
percentage points, Standardized Tier 1 capital ratio of 16.7% by 0.6
percentage points and Standardized Total capital ratio of 19.5% by 0.8
percentage points.  

In December 2021, the firm early adopted the U.S. federal bank regulatory
agencies’ final rule that implements the new standardized approach for
counterparty credit risk

(SA-CCR).

SA-CCR

replaced the current exposure method for calculating the exposure amount of
derivative contracts for determining Standardized RWAs and supplementary
leverage exposure. Adoption of

SA-CCR

resulted in a decrease to the firm’s Standardized CET1 capital ratio by
approximately 0.3 percentage points as of December 2021.  

Leverage Ratios.

The table below presents the leverage requirements.

In the table above, the SLR requirement of 5% includes a minimum of 3% and a
2% buffer applicable to

G-SIBs.

The table below presents information about leverage ratios.

In the table above:

Average total assets represents the average daily assets for the quarter
adjusted for the impact of CECL transition.  

Impact of SLR temporary amendment represented the exclusion of average
holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and average deposits at the Federal
Reserve as permitted by the FRB. The impact of this temporary amendment was an
increase in the firm’s SLR by approximately 1.0 percentage points for the
three months ended December 2020. The amendment permitting this exclusion
expired on April 1, 2021.  

Off-balance sheet and other exposures primarily includes the monthly average
of

off-balance

sheet exposures, consisting of derivatives, securities financing transactions,
commitments and guarantees.  

Tier 1 leverage ratio is calculated as Tier 1 capital divided by average
adjusted total assets.  

SLR is calculated as Tier 1 capital divided by total leverage exposure.
Adoption of

SA-CCR

in December 2021, as described above, did not result in a material impact to
the firm’s SLR for the three months ended December 2021.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Risk-Based Capital.

The table below presents information about risk-based capital.

In the table above:

Impact of CECL transition represents the impact of adoption as of January 1,
2020 and the impact of increasing regulatory capital by 25% of the increase in
the allowance for credit losses since January 1, 2020. The allowance for
credit losses within Standardized and Advanced Tier 2 capital also reflects
the impact of these adjustments.  

Deduction for identifiable intangible assets was net of deferred tax
liabilities of $17 million as of December 2021 and $29 million as of December

Deduction for investments in covered funds represents the firm’s aggregate
investments in applicable covered funds, excluding investments that are
subject to an extended conformance period. See Note 8 for further information
about the Volcker Rule.  

Other adjustments within CET1 capital and Tier 1 capital primarily include
credit valuation adjustments on derivative liabilities, the overfunded portion
of the firm’s defined benefit pension plan obligation net of associated
deferred tax liabilities, disallowed deferred tax assets, debt valuation
adjustments and other required credit risk-based deductions. Other adjustments
within Advanced Tier 2 capital include eligible credit reserves.  

Qualifying subordinated debt is subordinated debt issued by Group Inc. with an
original maturity of five years or greater. The outstanding amount of
subordinated debt qualifying for Tier 2 capital is reduced upon reaching a
remaining maturity of five years. See Note 14 for further information about
the firm’s subordinated debt.  

Junior subordinated debt is debt issued to a Trust. As of December 2021, 10%
of this debt was included in Tier 2 capital and 90% was phased out of
regulatory capital. As of December 2020, 20% of this debt was included in Tier
2 capital and 80% was phased out of regulatory capital. Junior subordinated
debt is reduced by the amount of Trust Preferred securities purchased by the
firm and was fully phased out of Tier 2 capital beginning in January 2022. See
Note 14 for further information about the firm’s junior subordinated debt and
Trust Preferred securities.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents changes in CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and Tier 2
capital.

RWAs.

RWAs are calculated in accordance with both the Standardized and Advanced
Capital Rules.

Credit Risk

Credit RWAs are calculated based on measures of exposure, which are then risk
weighted under the Standardized and Advanced Capital Rules:

The Standardized Capital Rules apply prescribed risk-weights, which depend
largely on the type of counterparty. The exposure measure for derivatives and
securities financing transactions are based on specific formulas which take
certain factors into consideration.  

Under the Advanced Capital Rules, the firm computes risk-weights for wholesale
and retail credit exposures in accordance with the Advanced Internal Ratings-
Based approach. The exposure measures for derivatives and securities financing
transactions are computed utilizing internal models.  

For both Standardized and Advanced credit RWAs, the risk-weights for
securitizations and equities are based on specific required formulaic
approaches.  

Market Risk

RWAs for market risk in accordance with the Standardized and Advanced Capital
Rules are generally consistent. Market RWAs are calculated based on measures
of exposure which include the following:

Value-at-Risk

(VaR) is the potential loss in value of trading assets and liabilities, as
well as certain investments, loans, and other financial assets and liabilities
accounted for at fair value, due to adverse market movements over a defined
time horizon with a specified confidence level.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

For both risk management purposes and regulatory capital calculations, the
firm uses a single VaR model which captures risks, including those related to
interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. However,
VaR used for risk management purposes differs from VaR used for regulatory
capital requirements (regulatory VaR) due to differences in time horizons,
confidence levels and the scope of positions on which VaR is calculated. For
risk management purposes, a 95%

one-day

VaR is used, whereas for regulatory capital requirements, a 99%

10-day

VaR is used to determine Market RWAs and a 99%

one-day

VaR is used to determine regulatory VaR exceptions. In addition, the daily net
revenues used to determine risk management VaR exceptions (i.e., comparing the
daily net revenues to the VaR measure calculated as of the end of the prior
business day) include intraday activity, whereas the Capital Framework
requires that intraday activity be excluded from daily net revenues when
calculating regulatory VaR exceptions. Intraday activity includes bid/offer
net revenues, which are more likely than not to be positive by their nature.
As a result, there may be differences in the number of VaR exceptions and the
amount of daily net revenues calculated for regulatory VaR compared to the
amounts calculated for risk management VaR.

The firm’s positional losses observed on a single day exceeded its 99%

one-day

regulatory VaR on one occasion during 2021 and on six occasions during 2020
(all of which occurred during March 2020 and, as permitted by the FRB, did not
have any impact on the firm’s VaR multiplier used to calculate Market RWAs);

Stressed VaR is the potential loss in value of trading assets and liabilities,
as well as certain investments, loans, and other financial assets and
liabilities accounted for at fair value, during a period of significant market
stress;  

Incremental risk is the potential loss in value of

non-securitized

positions due to the default or credit migration of issuers of financial
instruments over a

one-year

time horizon;  

Comprehensive risk is the potential loss in value, due to price risk and
defaults, within the firm’s credit correlation positions; and  

Specific risk is the risk of loss on a position that could result from factors
other than broad market movements, including event risk, default risk and
idiosyncratic risk. The standardized measurement method is used to determine
specific risk RWAs, by applying supervisory defined risk-weighting factors
after applicable netting is performed.  

Operational Risk

Operational RWAs are only required to be included under the Advanced Capital
Rules. The firm utilizes an internal risk-based model to quantify Operational
RWAs.

The table below presents information about RWAs.

In the table above:

Securities financing transactions represents resale and repurchase agreements
and securities borrowed and loaned transactions.  

Other includes receivables, certain debt securities, cash and cash
equivalents, and other assets.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents changes in RWAs.

RWAs Rollforward Commentary

Year Ended December 2021.

Standardized Credit RWAs as of December 2021 increased by $114.92 billion
compared with December 2020, primarily reflecting an increase in commitments,
guarantees and loans (principally due to increased lending activity and
revisions to certain interpretations of the Capital Rules underlying the RWA
calculation based on regulatory feedback) and an increase in derivatives
(principally due to increased exposures and the impact of SA-CCR adoption).
Standardized Market RWAs as of December 2021 increased by $7.79 billion
compared with December 2020, primarily reflecting an increase in stressed VaR
(principally due to increased exposures to interest rates).

Advanced Credit RWAs as of December 2021 increased by $25.79 billion compared
with December 2020, primarily reflecting an increase in commitments,
guarantees and loans (principally due to increased lending activity). This
increase was partially offset by a decrease in equity investments (principally
due to the sale of equity positions). Advanced Market RWAs as of December 2021
increased by $7.79 billion compared with December 2020, primarily reflecting
an increase in stressed VaR (principally due to increased exposures to
interest rates). Advanced Operational RWAs as of December 2021 increased by
$4.60 billion compared with December 2020, primarily associated with
litigation and regulatory proceedings.

Year Ended December 2020.

Standardized Credit RWAs as of December 2020 decreased by $13.55 billion
compared with December 2019, primarily reflecting a decrease in equity
investments (principally due to the sale of certain equity positions) and a
decrease in other (principally due to decreased receivables as a result of
changes in risk measurements). These decreases were partially offset by an
increase in securities financing transactions (principally due to increased
funding exposures). Standardized Market RWAs as of December 2020 increased by
$4.14 billion compared with December 2019, primarily reflecting an increase in
regulatory VaR (principally due to increased market volatility) and an
increase in incremental risk (principally due to increased exposures in
equities held for market-making purposes). These increases were partially
offset by a decrease in specific risk (principally due to changes in risk
measurements on certain exposures).

Advanced Credit RWAs as of December 2020 increased by $51.63 billion compared
with December 2019, primarily reflecting an increase in derivatives
(principally due to the impact of higher levels of volatility and counterparty
credit risk) and an increase in commitments, guarantees and loans (principally
due to increased lending activity). These increases were partially offset by a
decrease in equity investments (principally due to the sale of certain equity
positions). Advanced Market RWAs as of December 2020 increased by $4.34
billion compared with December 2019, primarily reflecting an increase in
regulatory VaR (principally due to increased market volatility) and an
increase in incremental risk (principally due to increased exposures in
equities held for market-making purposes). These increases were partially
offset by a decrease in specific risk (principally due to changes in risk
measurements on certain exposures). Advanced Operational RWAs as of December
2020 increased by $9.13 billion compared with December 2019. The vast majority
of this increase was associated with litigation and regulatory proceedings.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Bank Subsidiaries

GS Bank USA.

GS Bank USA is the firm’s primary U.S. bank subsidiary. GS Bank USA is an
FDIC-insured, New York State-chartered bank and a member of the Federal
Reserve System, is supervised and regulated by the FRB, the FDIC, the New York
State Department of Financial Services (NYDFS) and the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, and is subject to regulatory capital requirements that are
calculated under the Capital Framework. On July 1, 2021, GS Bank USA acquired
GSBE, a

non-U.S.

banking subsidiary of the firm, which is also subject to standalone regulatory
capital requirements noted below. GS Bank USA is an Advanced approach banking
organization under the Capital Framework.

The Capital Framework includes the minimum risk-based capital and the capital
conservation buffer requirements (consisting of a 2.5% buffer and the
countercyclical capital buffer). The buffer must consist entirely of capital
that qualifies as CET1 capital. In addition, the Capital Framework includes
the leverage ratio requirement.

GS Bank USA is required to calculate the CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and
Total capital ratios in accordance with both the Standardized and Advanced
Capital Rules. The lower of each risk-based capital ratio under the
Standardized and Advanced Capital Rules is the ratio against which GS Bank
USA’s compliance with its risk-based capital requirements is assessed. In
addition, under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action
applicable to GS Bank USA, in order to meet the quantitative requirements for
a “well-capitalized” depository institution, GS Bank USA must also meet the
“well-capitalized” requirements in the table below. GS Bank USA’s capital
levels and prompt corrective action classification are also subject to
qualitative judgments by the regulators about components of capital, risk
weightings and other factors. Failure to comply with the capital requirements,
including a breach of the buffers described below, would result in
restrictions being imposed by the regulators.

The table below presents GS Bank USA’s risk-based capital, leverage and “well-
capitalized” requirements.

In the table above:

The CET1 capital ratio requirement includes a minimum of 4.5%, the Tier 1
capital ratio requirement includes a minimum of 6.0% and the Total capital
ratio requirement includes a minimum of 8.0%. These requirements also include
the capital conservation buffer requirements consisting of a 2.5% buffer and
the countercyclical capital buffer, which the FRB has set to zero percent.  

The “well-capitalized” requirements are the binding requirements for leverage
ratios.  

The table below presents information about GS Bank USA’s risk-based capital
ratios.

In the table above:

In accordance with the reporting requirements for business combinations of
entities under common control, prior period amounts are presented as if the
acquisition of GSBE by GS Bank USA had occurred at the beginning of 2020.  

The lower of the Standardized or Advanced ratio is the ratio against which GS
Bank USA’s compliance with the capital requirements is assessed under the
risk-based Capital Rules, and therefore, the Standardized ratios applied to GS
Bank USA as of both December 2021 and December 2020.  

As permitted by the FRB, GS Bank USA elected to temporarily delay the
estimated effects of adopting CECL on regulatory capital until January 2022
and to subsequently

phase

in

the effects through January 2025. In addition, GS Bank USA elected to increase
regulatory capital by 25% of the increase in the allowance for credit losses
since January 1, 2020, as permitted by the rules issued by the FRB. The impact
of this increase will also be phased in over the three-year transition period.
Reflecting the full impact of CECL as of both December 2021 and December 2020
would not have had a material impact on GS Bank USA’s Standardized risk-based
capital ratios.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In connection with the regulatory feedback the firm received in the third
quarter of 2021, GS Bank USA revised certain interpretations of the Capital
Rules underlying the calculation of Standardized RWAs. As of December 2020,
this change would have increased GS Bank USA’s Standardized RWAs of $281
billion by approximately $11 billion, which would have reduced GS Bank USA’s
Standardized CET1 capital ratio of 12.3% by 0.4 percentage points,
Standardized Tier 1 capital ratio of 12.3% by 0.4 percentage points and
Standardized Total capital ratio of 14.6% by 0.6 percentage points.  

In December 2021, GS Bank USA adopted

SA-CCR

which resulted in an increase to GS Bank USA’s Standardized CET1 capital ratio
by approximately 1.9 percentage points as of December 2021.  

The Standardized risk-based capital ratios increased from December 2020 to
December 2021, reflecting an increase in capital due to capital contributions
and net earnings, partially offset by an increase in both Credit and Market
RWAs. The increase in Standardized Credit RWAs reflected an increase in
commitments, guarantees and loans (principally due to increased lending
activity and revisions to certain interpretations of the Capital Rules
underlying the RWA calculation based on regulatory feedback described above),
partially offset by a decrease in derivatives (principally due to the impact
of SA-CCR adoption described above). The increase in Standardized Market RWAs
primarily reflected an increase in stressed VaR and regulatory VaR (in each
case, principally due to increased exposures to interest rates).  

The Advanced risk-based capital ratios decreased from December 2020 to
December 2021, reflecting an increase in both Credit and Market RWAs,
partially offset by an increase in capital due to capital contributions and
net earnings. The increase in Advanced Credit RWAs reflected an increase in
commitments, guarantees and loans (principally due to increased lending
activity) and the increase in Advanced Market RWAs primarily reflected an
increase in stressed VaR and regulatory VaR (in each case, principally due to
increased exposures to interest rates).  

The table below presents information about GS Bank USA’s leverage ratios.

In the table above:

In accordance with the reporting requirements for business combinations of
entities under common control, prior period amounts are presented as if the
acquisition of GSBE by GS Bank USA had occurred at the beginning of 2020.  

Average adjusted total assets represents the average daily assets for the
quarter adjusted for deductions from Tier 1 capital and the impact of CECL
transition.  

Total leverage exposure, for the three months ended December 2020, excluded
average holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and average deposits at the
Federal Reserve as permitted by the FRB under a temporary amendment. The
impact of this temporary amendment was an increase in GS Bank USA’s SLR by
approximately 2.4 percentage points for the three months ended December 2020.
The amendment permitting this exclusion expired on April 1, 2021.  

Tier 1 leverage ratio is calculated as Tier 1 capital divided by average
adjusted total assets.  

SLR is calculated as Tier 1 capital divided by total leverage exposure.
Adoption of

SA-CCR

in December 2021 resulted in an increase to GS Bank USA’s SLR by approximately
0.2 percentage points for the three months ended December 2021.  

The deposits of GS Bank USA are insured by the FDIC to the extent provided by
law. The FRB requires that GS Bank USA maintain cash reserves with the Federal
Reserve. As of both December 2021 and December 2020, the reserve requirement
ratio was zero percent. The amount deposited by GS Bank USA at the Federal
Reserve was $122.01 billion as of December 2021 and $52.71 billion as of
December 2020.

GS Bank USA is a registered swap dealer with the CFTC and, beginning in the
fourth quarter of 2021, also became a registered security-based swap dealer
with the SEC. As of December 2021, GS Bank USA was subject to and in
compliance with applicable capital requirements for swap dealers and security-
based swap dealers.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

GSIB.

GSIB is our U.K. bank subsidiary regulated by the Prudential Regulation
Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). GSIB is subject to
the U.K. capital framework, which is largely based on Basel III.

The table below presents GSIB’s risk-based capital requirements.

The table below presents information about GSIB’s risk-based capital ratios.

In the table above, the risk-based capital ratios as of December 2021
reflected GSIB’s profits after foreseeable charges for the year ended December
2021 (which will not be finalized until verification by GSIB’s external
auditors and approval by GSIB’s Board of Directors for inclusion in risk-based
capital). These profits contributed approximately 68 basis points to the CET1
capital ratio.

The eligible retail deposits of GSIB are covered by the U.K. Financial
Services Compensation Scheme to the extent provided by law.

GSIB is subject to minimum reserve requirements at the Bank of England. The
minimum reserve requirement was $172 million as of December 2021 and $126
million as of December 2020. The amount deposited by GSIB at the Bank of
England was $2.20 billion as of December 2021 and $9.82 billion as of December

GSBE.

GSBE is our German bank subsidiary supervised by the European Central Bank,
BaFin and Deutsche Bundesbank. GSBE is subject to the capital requirements
prescribed in the amended E.U. Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) and E.U.
Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR), which are largely based on Basel III.

The table below presents GSBE’s risk-based capital requirements.

The table below presents information about GSBE’s risk-based capital ratios.

In the table above:

The risk-based capital ratios as of December 2021 reflected GSBE’s profits
after foreseeable charges for the year ended December 2021 (which will not be
finalized until verification by GSBE’s external auditors and approval by
GSBE’s shareholder (GS Bank USA) for inclusion in risk-based capital). These
profits contributed

approximately 106 basis points to the CET1 capital ratio.  

Risk-based capital ratios as of December 2021 reflected the CRR and the CRD
rules which implement changes in the Basel standards with respect to
counterparty credit risk and large exposure. These rules became effective in
June 2021. Adoption of these rules did not result in a material impact to
GSBE’s risk-based capital ratios as of December 2021.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents GSBE’s leverage ratio requirement which became
effective in June 2021 and the leverage ratio.

In the table above, the leverage ratio as of December 2021 reflected GSBE’s
profits after foreseeable charges for the year ended December 2021 (which will
not be finalized until verification by GSBE’s external auditors and approval
by GSBE’s shareholder (GS Bank USA) for inclusion in risk-based capital).
These profits contributed

approximately 58 basis points to the leverage ratio.

The deposits of GSBE are covered by the German statutory deposit protection
program to the extent provided by law. In addition, GSBE has elected to
participate in the German voluntary deposit protection program which provides
insurance for certain eligible deposits not covered by the German statutory
deposit program. GSBE is subject to minimum reserve requirements at central
banks in certain of the jurisdictions in which it operates. The minimum
reserve requirement was $189 million as of December 2021 and $25 million as of
December 2020. The amount deposited by GSBE at central banks was $20.36
billion as of December 2021 and $3.17 billion as of December 2020,
substantially all of which was deposited with Deutsche Bundesbank.

GSBE is a registered swap dealer with the CFTC and, beginning in the fourth
quarter of 2021, also became a registered security-based swap dealer with the
SEC. As of December 2021, GSBE was subject to and in compliance with
applicable capital requirements for swap dealers and security-based swap
dealers.

Restrictions on Payments

Group Inc. may be limited in its ability to access capital held at certain
subsidiaries as a result of regulatory, tax or other constraints. These
limitations include provisions of applicable law and regulations and other
regulatory restrictions that limit the ability of those subsidiaries to
declare and pay dividends without prior regulatory approval. For example, the
amount of dividends that may be paid by GS Bank USA are limited to the lesser
of the amounts calculated under a recent earnings test and an undivided
profits test. As a result of dividends paid in connection with the acquisition
of GSBE in July 2021, GS Bank USA cannot currently declare any additional
dividends without prior regulatory approval.

In addition, subsidiaries not subject to separate regulatory capital
requirements may hold capital to satisfy local tax and legal guidelines,
rating agency requirements (for entities with assigned credit ratings) or
internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum amount of capital
a subsidiary should hold based on its underlying level of risk.

Group Inc.’s equity investment in subsidiaries was $118.90 billion as of
December 2021 and $103.80 billion as of December 2020, of which Group Inc. was
required to maintain $77.22 billion as of December 2021 and $63.68 billion as
of December 2020, of minimum equity capital in its regulated subsidiaries in
order to satisfy the regulatory requirements of such subsidiaries.

Group Inc.’s capital invested in certain

non-U.S.

dollar functional currency subsidiaries is exposed to foreign exchange risk,
substantially all of which is managed through a combination of derivatives and

non-U.S.

dollar-denominated

debt. See Note 7 for information about the firm’s net investment hedges used
to hedge this risk.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 21.

Earnings Per Common Share

Basic EPS is calculated by dividing net earnings to common by the weighted
average number of common shares outstanding and restricted stock units (RSUs)
for which the delivery of the underlying common stock is not subject to
satisfaction of future service, performance or market conditions
(collectively, basic shares). Diluted EPS includes the determinants of basic
EPS and, in addition, reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock
deliverable for RSUs for which the delivery of the underlying common stock is
subject to satisfaction of future service, performance or market conditions.

The table below presents information about basic and diluted EPS.

In the table above:

Net earnings to common represents net earnings applicable to common
shareholders, which is calculated as net earnings less preferred stock
dividends.  

Unvested share-based awards that have

non-forfeitable

rights to dividends or dividend equivalents are treated as a separate class of
securities under the

two-class

method. Distributed earnings allocated to these securities reduce net earnings
to common to calculate EPS under this method. The impact of applying this
methodology was a reduction in basic EPS of $0.10 for 2021, and $0.07 for both
2020 and 2019.  

Note 22.

Transactions with Affiliated Funds

The firm has formed nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party
investors. As the firm generally acts as the investment manager for these
funds, it is entitled to receive management fees and, in certain cases,
advisory fees or incentive fees from these funds. Additionally, the firm
invests alongside the third-party investors in certain funds.

The tables below present information about affiliated funds.

The firm has waived, and may waive in the future, certain management fees on
selected money market funds to enhance the yield for investors in such funds.
Management fees waived were $595 million (of which $565 million related to
voluntary waivers on money market funds) for 2021, $109 million for 2020 and
$44 million for 2019.

The Volcker Rule restricts the firm from providing financial support to
covered funds (as defined in the rule) after the expiration of the conformance
period. As a general matter, in the ordinary course of business, the firm does
not expect to provide additional voluntary financial support to any covered
funds, but may choose to do so with respect to funds that are not subject to
the Volcker Rule. However, any such support is not expected to be material to
the results of operations of the firm.

In March 2020, GS Bank USA and unaffiliated entities purchased certificates of
deposit and commercial paper from two money market funds managed by the firm.
These funds are not covered funds under the Volcker Rule. GS Bank USA’s
purchase price of these securities was $1.84 billion, of which none were
outstanding as of December 2021 and $321 million were outstanding as of
December 2020. These purchases were made to promote liquidity in the short-
term credit markets and to increase the funds’ weekly liquid assets. Group
Inc. provided a guarantee to GS Bank USA in connection with these securities.
See Note 18 for information about guarantees provided by Group Inc. to
subsidiaries.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The firm had an outstanding guarantee, as permitted under the Volcker Rule, on
behalf of its funds, of $87 million as of December 2020. The firm had
voluntarily provided this guarantee in connection with a financing agreement
with a third-party lender executed by one of the firm’s real estate funds that
is not covered by the Volcker Rule. The firm had no outstanding guarantee as
of December 2021 and except as noted above, the firm has not provided any
additional financial support to its affiliated funds during 2021 and 2020.

In addition, in the ordinary course of business, the firm may also engage in
other activities with its affiliated funds, including, among others,
securities lending, trade execution, market-making, custody, and acquisition
and bridge financing. See Note 18 for information about the firm’s investment
commitments related to these funds.

Note 23.

Interest Income and Interest Expense

Interest is recorded over the life of the instrument on an accrual basis based
on contractual interest rates.

The table below presents sources of interest income and interest expense.

In the table above:

Collateralized agreements includes rebates paid and interest income on
securities borrowed.  

Loans excludes interest on loans held for sale that are accounted for at the
lower of cost or fair value. Such interest is included within other interest.  

Other interest income includes interest income on customer debit balances,
other interest-earning assets and loans held for sale that are accounted for
at the lower of cost or fair value.  

Collateralized financings consists of repurchase agreements and securities
loaned.  

Short- and long-term borrowings include both secured and unsecured borrowings.  

Other interest expense includes rebates received on other interest-bearing
liabilities and interest expense on customer credit balances.  

Note 24.

Income Taxes

Provision for Income Taxes

Income taxes are provided for using the asset and liability method under which
deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary differences
between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. The
firm reports interest expense related to income tax matters in provision for
taxes and income tax penalties in other expenses.

The table below presents information about the provision for taxes.

The table below presents a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory income
tax rate to the effective income tax rate.

In the table above,

Non-U.S.

operations include the impact of the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax and
Global Intangible Low Taxed Income (GILTI).

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Deferred Income Taxes

Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences
between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. These
temporary differences result in taxable or d

e

ductible amounts in future years and are measured using the tax rates and laws
that will be in effect when such differences are expected to reverse.
Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets to the
amount that more likely than not will be realized and primarily relate to the
ability to utilize losses in various tax jurisdictions. Tax assets are
included in other assets and tax liabilities are included in other
liabilities.

The table below presents information about deferred tax assets and
liabilities, excluding the impact of netting within tax jurisdictions.

The firm has recorded deferred tax assets of $681 million as of December 2021
and $510 million as of December 2020, in connection with U.S. federal, state
and local and foreign net operating loss carryforwards. The firm also recorded
a valuation allowance of $285 million as of December 2021 and $79 million as
of December 2020, related to these net operating loss carryforwards.

As of December 2021, the U.S. federal net operating loss carryforward was
$1.16 billion, the state and local net operating loss carryforward was $1.80
billion, and the foreign net operating loss carryforward was $1.31 billion. If
not utilized, the U.S. federal, the state and local, and foreign net operating
loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2022. If these carryforwards
expire, they will not have a material impact on the firm’s results of
operations. As of December 2021, the firm has recorded deferred tax assets of
$32 million in connection with general business credit carryforwards and $11
million in connection with state and local tax credit carryforwards. If not
utilized, the general business credit carryforward will begin to expire in
2022 and the state and local tax credit carryforward will begin to expire in
2023. As of December 2021, the firm did not have any foreign tax credit
carryforwards.

As of both December 2021 and December 2020, the firm had no U.S. capital loss
carryforwards and no related net deferred income tax assets. As of December
2021, the firm had deferred tax assets of $270 million in connection with
foreign capital loss carryforwards and a valuation allowance of $270 million
related to these capital loss carryforwards.

The valuation allowance increased by $344 million during 2021 and increased by
$84 million during 2020. The increases in both 2021 and 2020 were primarily
due to an increase in deferred tax assets from which the firm does not expect
to realize any benefit.

The firm permanently reinvested eligible earnings of certain foreign
subsidiaries. As of both December 2021 and December 2020, all U.S. taxes were
accrued on these subsidiaries’ distributable earnings.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Unrecognized Tax Benefits

The firm recognizes tax positions in the consolidated financial statements
only when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on
examination by the relevant taxing authority based on the technical merits of
the position. A position that meets this standard is measured at the largest
amount of benefit that will more likely than not be realized on settlement. A
liability is established for differences between positions taken in a tax
return and amounts recognized in the consolidated financial statements.

The accrued liability for interest expense related to income tax matters and
income tax penalties was $131 million as of December 2021 and $129 million as
of December 2020. The firm recognized interest expense and income tax
penalties of $13 million for 2021, $41 million for 2020 and $60 million for
2019. It is reasonably possible that unrecognized tax benefits could change
significantly during the twelve months subsequent to December 2021 due to
potential audit settlements. However, at this time it is not possible to
estimate any potential change.

The table below presents the changes in the liability for unrecognized tax
benefits, which is included in other liabilities.

Regulatory Tax Examinations

The firm is subject to examination by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
and other taxing authorities in jurisdictions where the firm has significant
business operations, such as the United Kingdom, Japan, Hong Kong and various
states, such as New York. The tax years under examination vary by
jurisdiction. The firm does not expect completion of these audits to have a
material impact on the firm’s financial condition, but it may be material to
operating results for a particular period, depending, in part, on the
operating results for that period.

The table below presents the earliest tax years that remain subject to
examination by major jurisdiction.

The firm has been accepted into the Compliance Assurance Process program by
the IRS for each of the tax years from 2013 through 2022. This program allows
the firm to work with the IRS to identify and resolve potential U.S. Federal
tax issues before the filing of tax returns. The fieldwork for tax years 2011
through 2018 has been completed and the final resolution is not expected to
have a material impact on the effective tax rate. The 2019 and 2020 tax years
remain subject to post-filing review. New York State and City examinations of
2015 through 2018 commenced during 2021.

All years, including and subsequent to the years in the table above, remain
open to examination by the taxing authorities. The firm believes that the
liability for unrecognized tax benefits it has established is adequate in
relation to the potential for additional assessments.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 25.

Business Segments

The firm reports its activities in four business segments: Investment Banking,
Global Markets, Asset Management and Consumer & Wealth Management. See Note 1
for information about the firm’s business segments.

Compensation and benefits expenses in the firm’s segments reflect, among other
factors, the overall performance of the firm, as well as the performance of
individual businesses. Consequently,

pre-tax

margins in one segment of the firm’s business may be significantly affected by
the performance of the firm’s other business segments.

The firm allocates assets (including allocations of global core liquid assets
and cash, secured client financing and other assets), revenues and expenses
among the four business segments. Due to the integrated nature of these
segments, estimates and judgments are made in allocating certain assets,
revenues and expenses. The allocation process is based on the manner in which
management currently views the performance of the segments.

The allocation of common shareholders’ equity and preferred stock dividends to
each segment is based on the estimated amount of equity required to support
the activities of the segment under relevant regulatory capital requirements.

Net earnings for each segment is calculated by applying the firmwide tax rate
to each segment’s

pre-tax

earnings.

Management believes that this allocation provides a reasonable representation
of each segment’s contribution to consolidated net earnings to common, return
on average common equity and total assets. Transactions between segments are
based on specific criteria or approximate third-party rates.

Segment Results

The table below presents a summary of the firm’s segment results.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

In the table above:

Revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are included in
determining

pre-tax

earnings.  

Net revenues in the firm’s segments include allocations of interest income and
expense to specific positions in relation to the cash generated by, or funding
requirements of, such positions. Net interest is included in segment net
revenues as it is consistent with how management assesses segment performance.  

Overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments are allocated
ratably based on direct segment expenses.  

Effective January 1, 2021, the allocation of attributed equity among the
firm’s segments was updated to reflect the results of the firm’s 2020
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review process. The average common equity
balances above incorporate such impact, as well as the changes in the size and
composition of assets held in each of the firm’s segments that occurred during
2021. See Note 20 for information about the firm’s updated SCB, which became
effective on October 1, 2021.  

The table below presents depreciation and amortization expense by segment.

Segment Assets

The table below presents assets by segment.

The table below presents gross loans by segment and loan type, and allowance
for loan losses by segment.

See Note 9 for further information about loans.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Geographic Information

Due to the highly integrated nature of international financial markets, the
firm manages its businesses based on the profitability of the enterprise as a
whole. The methodology for allocating profitability to geographic regions is
dependent on estimates and management judgment because a significant portion
of the firm’s activities require cross-border coordination in order to
facilitate the needs of the firm’s clients. Geographic results are generally
allocated as follows:

Investment Banking: location of the client and investment banking team.  

Global Markets: FICC and Equities intermediation: location of the market-
making desk; FICC and Equities financing (excluding prime brokerage
financing): location of the desk; prime brokerage financing: location of the
primary market for the underlying security.  

Asset Management (excluding Equity investments and Lending and debt
investments): location of the sales team; Equity investments: location of the
investment; Lending and debt investments: location of the client.  

Consumer & Wealth Management: Wealth management: location of the sales team;
Consumer banking: location of the client.  

The table below presents total net revenues,

pre-tax

earnings and net earnings by geographic region.

In the table above:

Asia

pre-tax

earnings and net earnings for 2020 and 2019 were impacted by net provisions
for litigation and regulatory proceedings.  

Substantially all of the amounts in Americas were attributable to the U.S.  

Asia includes Australia a

n

d New Zealand.  

Note 26.

Credit Concentrations

The firm’s concentrations of credit risk arise from its market making, client
facilitation, investing, underwriting, lending and collateralized
transactions, and cash management activities, and may be impacted by changes
in economic, industry or political factors. These activities expose the firm
to many different industries and counterparties, and may also subject the firm
to a concentration of credit risk to a particular central bank, counterparty,
borrower or issuer, including sovereign issuers, or to a particular clearing
house or exchange. The firm seeks to mitigate credit risk by actively
monitoring exposures and obtaining collateral from counterparties as deemed
appropriate.

The firm measures and monitors its credit exposure based on amounts owed to
the firm after taking into account risk mitigants that the firm considers when
determining credit risk. Such risk mitigants include netting and collateral
arrangements and economic hedges, such as credit derivatives, futures and
forward contracts. Netting and collateral agreements permit the firm to offset
receivables and payables with such counterparties and/or enable the firm to
obtain collateral on an upfront or contingent basis.

The table below presents the credit concentrations included in trading cash
instruments and investments.

In addition, the firm had $222.20 billion as of December 2021 and $116.63
billion as of December 2020 of cash deposits held at central banks (included
in cash and cash equivalents), of which $122.01 billion as of December 2021
and $52.71 billion as of December 2020 was held at the Fed

e

ral Reserve.

As of both December 2021 and December 2020, the firm did not have credit
exposure to any other counterparty that exceeded 2% of total assets.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Collateral obtained by the firm related to derivative assets is principally
cash and is held by the firm or a third-party custodian. Collateral obtained
by the firm related to resale agreements and securities borrowed transactions
is primarily U.S. government and agency obligations and

non-U.S.

government and ag

e

ncy obligations. See Note 11 for further information about collateralized
agreements and financings.  

The table below presents U.S. government and agency obligations and

non-U.S.

government and agency obligations that collateralize resale agreements and
securities borrowed transactions.

In the table above:

Non-U.S.

government and agency obligations primarily consists of securities issued by
the governments of the U.K., France and Japan.  

Given that the firm’s primary credit exposure on such transactions is to the
counterparty to the transaction, the firm would be exposed to the collateral
issuer only in the event of counterparty default.  

Note 27.

Legal Proceedings

The firm is involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration
proceedings (including those described below) concerning matters arising in
connection with the conduct of the firm’s businesses. Many of these
proceedings are in early stages, and many of these cases seek an indeterminate
amount of damages.

Under ASC 450, an event is “reasonably possible” if “the chance of the future
event or events occurring is more than remote but less than likely” and an
event is “remote” if “the chance of the future event or events occurring is
slight.” Thus, references to the upper end of the range of reasonably possible
loss for cases in which the firm is able to estimate a range of reasonably
possible loss mean the upper end of the range of loss for cases for which the
firm believes the risk of loss is more than slight.

With respect to matters described below for which management has been able to
estimate a range of reasonably possible loss where (i) actual or potential
plaintiffs have claimed an amount of money damages, (ii) the firm is being, or
threatened to be, sued by purchasers in a securities offering and is not being
indemnified by a party that the firm believes will pay the full amount of any
judgment, or (iii) the purchasers are demanding that the firm repurchase
securities, management has estimated the upper end of the range of reasonably
possible loss based on (a) in the case of (i), the amount of money damages
claimed, (b) in the case of (ii), the difference between the initial sales
price of the securities that the firm sold in such offering and the estimated
lowest subsequent price of such securities prior to the action being commenced
and (c) in the case of (iii), the price that purchasers paid for the
securities less the estimated value, if any, as of December 2021 of the
relevant securities, in each of cases (i), (ii) and (iii), taking into account
any other factors believed to be relevant to the particular matter or matters
of that type. As of the date hereof, the firm has estimated the upper end of
the range of reasonably possible aggregate loss for such matters and for any
other matters described below where management has been able to estimate a
range of reasonably possible aggregate loss to be approximately $2.0 billion
in excess of the aggregate reserves for such matters.

Management is generally unable to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss
for matters other than those included in the estimate above, including where
(i) actual or potential plaintiffs have not claimed an amount of money
damages, except in those instances where management can otherwise determine an
appropriate amount, (ii) matters are in early stages, (iii) matters relate to
regulatory investigations or reviews, except in those instances where
management can otherwise determine an appropriate amount, (iv) there is
uncertainty as to the likelihood of a class being certified or the ultimate
size of the class, (v) there is uncertainty as to the outcome of pending
appeals or motions, (vi) there are significant factual issues to be resolved,
and/or (vii) there are novel legal issues presented. For example, the firm’s
potential liabilities with respect to the investigations and reviews described
below in “Regulatory Investigations and Reviews and Related Litigation”
generally are not included in management’s estimate of reasonably possible
loss. However, management does not believe, based on currently available
information, that the outcomes of such other matters will have a material
adverse effect on the firm’s financial condition, though the outcomes could be
material to the firm’s operating results for any particular period, depending,
in part, upon the operating results for such period.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

1MDB-Related Matters

Between 2012 and 2013, subsidiaries of the firm acted as arrangers or
purchasers of approximately $6.5 billion of debt securities of 1MDB.

On November 1, 2018, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) unsealed a criminal
information and guilty plea by Tim Leissner, a former participating managing
director of the firm, and an indictment against Ng Chong Hwa, a former
managing director of the firm. On August 28, 2018, Leissner was adjudicated
guilty by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York of
conspiring to launder money and to violate the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices
Act’s (FCPA) anti-bribery and internal accounting controls provisions. Ng was
charged with conspiring to launder money and to violate the FCPA’s anti-
bribery and internal accounting controls provisions. On May 6, 2019, Ng
pleaded not guilty to the DOJ’s criminal charges, and trial commenced on
February 7, 2022.

On August 18, 2020, the firm announced that it entered into a settlement
agreement with the Government of Malaysia to resolve the criminal and
regulatory proceedings in Malaysia involving the firm, which includes a
guarantee that the Government of Malaysia receives at least $1.4 billion in
assets and proceeds from assets seized by governmental authorities around the
world related to 1MDB. See Note 18 for further information about this
guarantee.

On October 22, 2020, the firm announced that it reached settlements of
governmental and regulatory investigations relating to 1MDB with the DOJ, the
SEC, the FRB, the NYDFS, the FCA, the PRA, the Singapore Attorney General’s
Chambers, the Singapore Commercial Affairs Department, the Monetary Authority
of Singapore and the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission. Group Inc.
entered into a three-year deferred prosecution agreement with the DOJ, in
which a charge against the firm, one count of conspiracy to violate the FCPA,
was filed and will later be dismissed if the firm abides by the terms of the
agreement. In addition, GS Malaysia pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy
to violate the FCPA, and was sentenced on June 9, 2021. In May 2021, the U.S.
Department of Labor granted the firm a five-year exemption to maintain its
status as a qualified professional asset manager (QPAM).

The firm has received multiple demands, beginning in November 2018, from
alleged shareholders under Section 220 of the Delaware General Corporation Law
for books and records relating to, among other things, the firm’s involvement
with 1MDB and the firm’s compliance procedures. On December 13, 2019, an
alleged shareholder filed a lawsuit in the Court of Chancery of the State of
Delaware seeking books and records relating to, among other things, the firm’s
involvement with 1MDB and the firm’s compliance procedures. The lawsuit was
dismissed without prejudice on August 4, 2021.

On February 19, 2019, a purported shareholder derivative action relating to
1MDB was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New
York against Group Inc. and the directors at the time and a former chairman
and chief executive officer of the firm. The second amended complaint filed on
November 13, 2020, alleges breaches of fiduciary duties, including in
connection with alleged insider trading by certain current and former
directors, unjust enrichment and violations of the anti-fraud provisions of
the Exchange Act, including in connection with Group Inc.’s common stock
repurchases and solicitation of proxies, and seeks unspecified damages,
disgorgement and injunctive relief. Defendants moved to dismiss this action on
January 15, 2021. On February 3, 2022, the parties reached a settlement in
principle, subject to final documentation and court approval, to resolve this
action.

Beginning in March 2019, the firm has also received demands from three
shareholders to investigate and pursue claims against certain current and
former directors and executive officers based on their oversight and public
disclosures regarding 1MDB and related internal controls. In June 2019, the
Board appointed a Special Committee to consider the demands and, in January
2021, the Board voted to reject them. In June 2021, the firm reached a
settlement with the three shareholders. Following the Board’s decision to
reject the initial three demands, the firm received two additional demands
from alleged shareholders (one of which is the alleged shareholder that filed
the December 2019 books and records action in Delaware Chancery Court) to
investigate and pursue claims related to 1MDB (and, for one of the demands,
other matters) against other parties, including certain current and former
directors and executive officers of the firm. In December 2021, the Board
voted to reject the two additional demands.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

On December 20, 2018, a putative securities class action lawsuit was filed in
the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York against Group
Inc. and certain former officers of the firm alleging violations of the anti-
fraud provisions of the Exchange Act with respect to Group Inc.’s disclosures
and public statements concerning 1MDB and seeking unspecified damages. The
plaintiffs filed the second amended complaint on October 28, 2019. On June 28,
2021, the court dismissed the claims against one of the individual defendants
but denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss with respect to the firm and the
remaining individual defendants. On November 12, 2021, the plaintiffs moved
for class certification.

Mortgage-Related Matters

Beginning in April 2010, a number of purported securities law class actions
were filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York
challenging the adequacy of Group Inc.’s public disclosure of, among other
things, the firm’s activities in the collateralized debt obligation market,
and the firm’s conflict of interest management.

The consolidated amended complaint filed on July 25, 2011, which named as
defendants Group Inc. and certain current and former officers and employees of
Group Inc. and its affiliates, generally alleges violations of Sections 10(b)
and 20(a) of the Exchange Act and seeks monetary damages. The defendants have
moved for summary judgment. On April 7, 2020, the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals affirmed the district court’s August 14, 2018 grant of class
certification. On June 21, 2021, the United States Supreme Court vacated the
judgment of the Second Circuit and remanded the case for further proceedings,
and on August 26, 2021, the Second Circuit vacated the district court’s grant
of class certification and remanded the case for further proceedings. On
December 8, 2021, the district court granted the plaintiffs’ motion for class
certification. On December 22, 2021, defendants filed a petition with the
Second Circuit seeking interlocutory review of the district court’s grant of
class certification.

Complaints were filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York on July 25, 2019 and May 29, 2020 against Goldman Sachs Mortgage
Company and GS Mortgage Securities Corp. by U.S. Bank National Association, as
trustee for two residential mortgage-backed securitization trusts that issued
$1.7 billion of securities. The complaints generally allege that mortgage
loans in the trusts failed to conform to applicable representations and
warranties and seek specific performance or, alternatively, compensatory
damages and other relief. On November 23, 2020, the court granted in part and
denied in part defendants’ motion to dismiss the complaint in the first action
and denied defendants’ motion to dismiss the complaint in the second action.
On January 14, 2021, amended complaints were filed in both actions.

Currencies-Related Litigation

GS&Co. and Group Inc. are among the defendants named in an action filed in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York on November 7, 2018,
and GSI, GSIB, Goldman Sachs Group UK Limited and GS Bank USA are among the
defendants in an action filed in the High Court of England and Wales on
November 11, 2020, in each case by certain direct purchasers of foreign
exchange instruments that opted out of a class settlement reached with, among
others, GS&Co. and Group Inc. The third amended complaint in the U.S. district
court action, filed on August 3, 2020, generally alleges that the defendants
violated federal antitrust law and state common law in connection with an
alleged conspiracy to manipulate the foreign currency exchange markets and
seeks declaratory and injunctive relief, as well as unspecified amounts of
compensatory, punitive, treble and other damages. The claim in the English
action is for breaches of English and E.U. competition rules from 2003 to 2013
and alleges manipulation of foreign exchange rates and bid/offer spreads, the
exchange of commercially sensitive information among defendants and collusive
trading.

GS&Co. is among the defendants named in a putative class action filed in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York on August 4, 2021.
The amended complaint, filed on January 6, 2022, generally asserts claims
under federal antitrust law and state common law in connection with an alleged
conspiracy among the defendants to manipulate auctions for foreign exchange
transactions on an electronic trading platform, as well as claims under the
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. The complaint seeks
declaratory and injunctive relief, as well as unspecified amounts of treble
and other damages.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Banco Espirito Santo S.A. and Oak Finance

Beginning in February 2015, GSI commenced actions against Novo Banco S.A.
(Novo Banco) in the English Commercial Court and the Bank of Portugal (BoP) in
Portuguese Administrative Court in response to BoP’s decisions in December
2014, September 2015 and December 2015 to reverse an earlier transfer to Novo
Banco of an $835 million facility agreement (the Facility), structured by GSI,
between Oak Finance Luxembourg S.A. (Oak Finance), a special purpose vehicle
formed in connection with the Facility, and Banco Espirito Santo S.A. (BES)
prior to the failure of BES. In July 2018, the English Supreme Court found
that the English courts did not yet have jurisdiction over GSI’s action. In
July 2018, the Liquidation Committee for BES issued a decision seeking to claw
back from GSI $54 million paid to GSI and $50 million paid to Oak Finance in
connection with the Facility, alleging that GSI acted in bad faith in
extending the Facility, including because GSI allegedly knew that BES was at
risk of imminent failure. In October 2018, GSI commenced an action in Lisbon
Commercial Court challenging the Liquidation Committee’s decision and has
since also issued a claim against the Portuguese State seeking compensation
for losses of approximately $222 million related to the failure of BES,
together with a contingent claim for the $104 million sought by the
Liquidation Committee.

Financial Advisory Services

Group Inc. and certain of its affiliates are from time to time parties to
various civil litigation and arbitration proceedings and other disputes with
clients and third parties relating to the firm’s financial advisory
activities. These claims generally seek, among other things, compensatory
damages and, in some cases, punitive damages, and in certain cases allege that
the firm did not appropriately disclose or deal with conflicts of interest.

Archegos-Related Matters

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on August 13, 2021 in New York Supreme Court, County of New
York, relating to ViacomCBS Inc.’s (ViacomCBS) March 2021 public offerings of
$1.7 billion of common stock and $1.0 billion of preferred stock. In addition
to the underwriters, the defendants include ViacomCBS and certain of its
officers and directors. GS&Co. underwrote 646,154 shares of common stock
representing an aggregate offering price of approximately $55 million and
323,077 shares of preferred stock representing an aggregate offering price of
approximately $32 million. The complaint asserts claims under the federal
securities laws and alleges that the offering documents contained material
misstatements and omissions, including, among other things, that the offering
documents failed to disclose that Archegos Capital Management (Archegos) had
substantial exposure to ViacomCBS, including through total return swaps to
which certain of the underwriters, including GS&Co., were allegedly
counterparties, and that such underwriters failed to disclose their exposure
to Archegos. The complaint seeks rescission and compensatory damages in
unspecified amounts. On November 5, 2021,

the

plaintiffs filed an amended complaint, and, on December 22, 2021,

the

defendants filed motions to dismiss the amended complaint. On January 4, 2022,
the plaintiffs moved for class certification.

Group Inc. is also a defendant in putative securities class actions filed
beginning in October 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District
of New York. The complaints allege that Group Inc., along with another
financial institution, sold shares in Vipshop Holdings Ltd. (Vipshop), GSX
Techedu Inc. (Gaotu), Tencent Music Entertainment Group (Tencent), ViacomCBS,
iQIYI Inc. (iQIYI) and Baidu Inc. (Baidu) based on material nonpublic
information regarding the liquidation of Archegos’ position in Vipshop, Gaotu,
Tencent, ViacomCBS, iQIYI and Baidu, respectively. The complaints generally
assert violations of Sections 10(b), 20A and 20(a) of the Exchange Act and
seek unspecified damages.

On January 24, 2022, the firm received a demand from an alleged shareholder
under Section 220 of the Delaware General Corporation Law for books and
records relating to, among other things, the firm’s involvement with Archegos
and the firm’s controls with respect to insider trading.

Underwriting Litigation

Firm affiliates are among the defendants in a number of proceedings in
connection with securities offerings. In these proceedings, including those
described below, the plaintiffs assert class action or individual claims under
federal and state securities laws and in some cases other applicable laws,
allege that the offering documents for the securities that they purchased
contained material misstatements and omissions, and generally seek
compensatory and rescissory damages in unspecified amounts, as well as
rescission. Certain of these proceedings involve additional allegations.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Altice USA, Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in putative securities
class actions pending in New York Supreme Court, County of Queens, and the
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York beginning in June
2018, relating to Altice USA, Inc.’s (Altice) $2.15 billion June 2017 initial
public offering. In addition to the underwriters, the defendants include
Altice and certain of its officers and directors. GS&Co. underwrote 12,280,042
shares of common stock representing an aggregate offering price of
approximately $368 million. On June 26, 2020, the court dismissed the amended
complaint in the state court action, and on September 4, 2020, plaintiffs
moved for leave to file a consolidated amended complaint. Plaintiffs in the
district court action filed a second amended complaint on October 7, 2020. On
November 8, 2021, the state court preliminarily approved a settlement. The
firm will not be required to contribute to the settlement.

Uber Technologies, Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in several putative
securities class actions filed beginning in September 2019 in California
Superior Court, County of San Francisco and the U.S. District Court for the
Northern District of California, relating to Uber Technologies, Inc.’s (Uber)
$8.1 billion May 2019 initial public offering. In addition to the
underwriters, the defendants include Uber and certain of its officers and
directors. GS&Co. underwrote 35,864,408 shares of common stock representing an
aggregate offering price of approximately $1.6 billion. On November 16, 2020,
the court in the state court action granted defendants’ motion to dismiss the
consolidated amended complaint filed on February 11, 2020, and on December 16,
2020, plaintiffs appealed. On August 7, 2020, defendants’ motion to dismiss
the district court action was denied. On September 25, 2020, the plaintiffs in
the district court action moved for class certification. On December 5, 2020,
the plaintiffs in the state court action filed a complaint in the district
court, which was consolidated with the existing district court action on
January 25, 2021. On May 14, 2021, the plaintiffs filed a second amended
complaint in the district court, purporting to add the plaintiffs from the
state court action as additional class representatives. On October 1, 2021,
defendants’ motion to dismiss the additional class representatives from the
second amended complaint was denied, and, on October 29, 2021, the plaintiffs
in the district court action filed a revised motion for class certification.

Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on September 12, 2019 in New York Supreme Court, County of
New York, relating to Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.’s (Alnylam) $805 million
November 2017 public offering of common stock. In addition to the
underwriters, the defendants include Alnylam and certain of its officers and
directors. GS&Co. underwrote 2,576,000 shares of common stock representing an
aggregate offering price of approximately $322 million. On October 30, 2020,
the court denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss the amended complaint filed
on November 7, 2019. On February 22, 2021, the plaintiffs moved for class
certification. On April 29, 2021, the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court
of the State of New York for the First Department denied defendants’ appeal of
the New York Supreme Court’s denial of the defendants’ motion to dismiss the
amended complaint, except with respect to one of the plaintiffs’ claims
against Alnylam’s officers and directors. On December 3, 2021, the court
preliminarily approved a settlement. The firm will not be required to
contribute to the settlement.

Venator Materials PLC.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in putative securities
class actions in Texas District Court, Dallas County, New York Supreme Court,
New York County, and the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
Texas, filed beginning in February 2019, relating to Venator Materials PLC’s
(Venator) $522 million August 2017 initial public offering and $534 million
December 2017 secondary equity offering. In addition to the underwriters, the
defendants include Venator, certain of its officers and directors and certain
of its shareholders. GS&Co. underwrote 6,351,347 shares of common stock in the
August 2017 initial public offering representing an aggregate offering price
of approximately $127 million and 5,625,768 shares of common stock in the
December 2017 secondary equity offering representing an aggregate offering
price of approximately $127 million. On January 21, 2020, the Texas Court of
Appeals reversed the Texas District Court and dismissed the claims against the
underwriter defendants, including GS&Co., in the Texas state court action for
lack of personal jurisdiction. On March 22, 2021, the defendants’ motion to
dismiss the New York state court action was granted and the plaintiffs have
filed a notice of appeal. On July 7, 2021, the court in the federal action
granted in part and denied in part defendants’ motion to dismiss the
consolidated complaint. On August 16, 2021, the plaintiffs in the federal
action filed an amended consolidated complaint. On November 19, 2021, the
plaintiffs in the putative class action moved for class certification.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

XP Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in putative securities
class actions pending in New York Supreme Court, County of New York, and the
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of York, filed beginning March
19, 2020, relating to XP Inc.’s (XP) $2.3 billion December 2019 initial public
offering. In addition to the underwriters, the defendants include XP, certain
of its officers and directors and certain of its shareholders. GS&Co.
underwrote 19,326,218 shares of common stock in the December 2019 initial
public offering representing an aggregate offering price of approximately $522
million. On August 5, 2020, defendants’ motion to stay the state court action
in favor of the federal court action was denied. On February 8, 2021, the
state court granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss the state court action,
and on March 7, 2021, the district court granted the defendants’ motion to
dismiss the federal court action. On

November 22, 2021, the Second

Circuit affirmed the district court’s order granting the defendants’ motion to
dismiss.

GoHealth, Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in putative securities
class actions filed beginning on September 21, 2020 and consolidated in the
U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Illinois relating to
GoHealth, Inc.’s (GoHealth) $914 million July 2020 initial public offering. In
addition to the underwriters, the defendants include GoHealth, certain of its
officers and directors and certain of its shareholders. GS&Co. underwrote
11,540,550 shares of common stock representing an aggregate offering price of
approximately $242 million. On February 25, 2021, the plaintiffs filed a
consolidated complaint. On April 26, 2021, the defendants filed a motion to
dismiss the consolidated complaint.

Array Technologies, Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on May 14, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of New York, relating to Array Technologies, Inc.’s (Array) $1.2
billion October 2020 initial public offering of common stock, $1.3 billion
December 2020 offering of common stock and $993 million March 2021 offering of
common stock. In addition to the underwriters, the defendants include Array
and certain of its officers and directors. GS&Co. underwrote an aggregate of
31,912,213 shares of common stock in the three offerings representing an
aggregate offering price of approximately $877 million. On December 7, 2021,
the plaintiffs filed an amended consolidated complaint.

Skillz Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on October 8, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the
Northern District of California relating to Skillz Inc.’s (Skillz)
approximately $883 million March 2021 public offering of common stock. In
addition to the underwriters, the defendants include Skillz and certain of its
officers and directors. GS&Co. underwrote 8,832,000 shares of common stock
representing an aggregate offering price of approximately $212 million. On
December 23, 2021, the defendants filed a motion to dismiss the amended
consolidated complaint.

ContextLogic Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in putative securities
class actions filed beginning on May 17, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for
the Northern District of California, relating to ContextLogic Inc.’s
(ContextLogic) $1.1 billion December 2020 initial public offering of common
stock. In addition to the underwriters, the defendants include ContextLogic
and certain of its officers and directors. GS&Co. underwrote 16,169,000 shares
of common stock representing an aggregate offering price of approximately $388
million.

DiDi Global Inc.

Goldman Sachs (Asia) L.L.C. (GS Asia) is among the underwriters named as
defendants in putative securities class actions filed beginning on July 6,
2021 in the U.S. District Courts for the Southern District of New York and the
Central District of California relating to DiDi Global Inc.’s (DiDi) $4.4
billion June 2021 initial public offering of American Depositary Shares (ADS).
In addition to the underwriters, the defendants include DiDi and certain of
its officers and directors. GS Asia underwrote 104,554,000 ADS representing an
aggregate offering price of approximately $1.5 billion. On September 22, 2021,
plaintiffs in the California action voluntarily dismissed their claims without
prejudice. On January 7, 2022, plaintiffs in the federal action filed a
consolidated amended complaint, which includes allegations of violations of
Sections 10(b) and 20A of the Exchange Act against the underwriter defendants.

Vroom Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on October 4, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York relating to Vroom Inc.’s (Vroom) approximately
$589 million September 2020 public offering of common stock. In addition to
the underwriters, the defendants include Vroom and certain of its officers and
directors. GS&Co. underwrote 3,886,819 shares of common stock representing an
aggregate offering price of approximately $212 million. On December 20, 2021,
the defendants served a motion to dismiss the consolidated complaint.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Zymergen Inc.

GS&Co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on August 4, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the
Northern District of California relating to Zymergen Inc.’s (Zymergen) $575
million April 2021 initial public offering of common stock. In addition to the
underwriters, the defendants include Zymergen and certain of its officers and
directors. GS&Co. underwrote 5,750,345 shares of common stock representing an
aggregate offering price of approximately $178 million.

Waterdrop Inc.

GS Asia is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities
class action filed on September 14, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York relating to Waterdrop Inc.’s (Waterdrop) $360
million May 2021 initial public offering of ADS. In addition to the
underwriters, the defendants include Waterdrop and certain of its officers and
directors. GS Asia underwrote 15,300,000 ADS representing an aggregate
offering price of approximately $184 million.

Investment Management Services

Group Inc. and certain of its affiliates are parties to various civil
litigation and arbitration proceedings and other disputes with clients
relating to losses allegedly sustained as a result of the firm’s investment
management services. These claims generally seek, among other things,
restitution or other compensatory damages and, in some cases, punitive
damages.

Securities Lending Antitrust Litigation

Group Inc. and GS&Co. are among the defendants named in a putative antitrust
class action and three individual actions relating to securities lending
practices filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New
York beginning in August 2017. The complaints generally assert claims under
federal and state antitrust law and state common law in connection with an
alleged conspiracy among the defendants to preclude the development of
electronic platforms for securities lending transactions. The individual
complaints also assert claims for tortious interference with business
relations and under state trade practices law and, in the second and third
individual actions, unjust enrichment under state common law. The complaints
seek declaratory and injunctive relief, as well as unspecified amounts of
compensatory, treble, punitive and other damages. Group Inc. was voluntarily
dismissed from the putative class action on January 26, 2018. Defendants’
motion to dismiss the class action complaint was denied on September 27, 2018.
Defendants’ motion to dismiss the first individual action was granted on
August 7, 2019. The plaintiffs in the putative class action moved for class
certification on February 22, 2021. On September 30, 2021, the defendants’
motion to dismiss the second and third individual actions, which were
consolidated in June 2019, was granted. On October 25, 2021, the plaintiff in
the second individual action appealed to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.

Variable Rate Demand Obligations Antitrust Litigation

GS&Co. is among the defendants named in a putative class action relating to
variable rate demand obligations (VRDOs), filed beginning in February 2019
under separate complaints and consolidated in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York. The consolidated amended complaint, filed on
May 31, 2019, generally asserts claims under federal antitrust law and state
common law in connection with an alleged conspiracy among the defendants to
manipulate the market for VRDOs. The complaint seeks declaratory and
injunctive relief, as well as unspecified amounts of compensatory, treble and
other damages. On November 2, 2020, the court granted in part and denied in
part the defendants’ motion to dismiss, dismissing the state common law claims
against GS&Co., but denying dismissal of the federal antitrust law claims.

GS&Co. is also among the defendants named in a related putative class action
filed on June 2, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York. The complaint alleges the same conspiracy in the market for VRDOs as
that alleged in the consolidated amended complaint filed on May 31, 2019, and
asserts federal antitrust law, state law and state common law claims against
the defendants. The complaint seeks declaratory and injunctive relief, as well
as unspecified amounts of compensatory, treble and other damages.

On August 6, 2021, plaintiffs

in the May 31, 2019 action filed an amended complaint consolidating the June
2, 2021 action with the May 31, 2019 action. On September 14, 2021, defendants
filed a joint partial motion to dismiss the

August 6, 2021 amended

consolidated complaint.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Interest Rate Swap Antitrust Litigation

Group Inc., GS&Co., GSI, GS Bank USA and Goldman Sachs Financial Markets, L.P.
are among the defendants named in a putative antitrust class action relating
to the trading of interest rate swaps, filed in November 2015 and consolidated
in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The same
Goldman Sachs entities

are

also among the defendants named in two antitrust actions relating to the
trading of interest rate swaps, commenced in April 2016 and June 2018,
respectively, in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York
by three operators of swap execution facilities and certain of their
affiliates. These actions have been consolidated for pretrial proceedings. The
complaints generally assert claims under federal antitrust law and state
common law in connection with an alleged conspiracy among the defendants to
preclude exchange trading of interest rate swaps. The complaints in the
individual actions also assert claims under state antitrust law. The
complaints seek declaratory and injunctive relief, as well as treble damages
in an unspecified amount. Defendants moved to dismiss the class and the first
individual action and the district court dismissed the state common law claims
asserted by the plaintiffs in the first individual action and otherwise
limited the state common law claim in the putative class action and the
antitrust claims in both actions to the period from 2013 to 2016. On November
20, 2018, the court granted in part and denied in part the defendants’ motion
to dismiss the second individual action, dismissing the state common law
claims for unjust enrichment and tortious interference, but denying dismissal
of the federal and state antitrust claims. On March 13, 2019, the court denied
the plaintiffs’ motion in the putative class action to amend their complaint
to add allegations related to

conduct from

to

2012, but granted the motion to add limited allegations from 2013

to

2016, which the plaintiffs added in a fourth consolidated amended complaint
filed on March 22, 2019. The plaintiffs in the putative class action moved for
class certification on March 7, 2019.

Commodities-Related Litigation

GSI is among the defendants named in putative class actions relating to
trading in platinum and palladium, filed beginning on November 25, 2014 and
most recently amended on May 15, 2017, in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York. The amended complaint generally alleges that
the defendants violated federal antitrust laws and the Commodity Exchange Act
in connection with an alleged conspiracy to manipulate a benchmark for
physical platinum and palladium prices and seek declaratory and injunctive
relief, as well as treble damages in an unspecified amount. On March 29, 2020,
the court granted the defendants’ motions to dismiss and for reconsideration,
resulting in the dismissal of all claims. On April 27, 2020, plaintiffs
appealed to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.

GS&Co., GSI, J. Aron & Company and Metro International Trade Services (Metro),
a previously consolidated subsidiary of Group Inc. that was sold in the fourth
quarter of 2014, are among the defendants in a number of putative class and
individual actions filed beginning on August 1, 2013 and consolidated in the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The complaints
generally allege violations of federal antitrust laws and state laws in
connection with the storage of aluminum and aluminum trading. The complaints
seek declaratory, injunctive and other equitable relief, as well as
unspecified monetary damages, including treble damages. In December 2016, the
district court granted defendants’ motions to dismiss and on August 27, 2019,
the Second Circuit vacated the district court’s dismissals and remanded the
case to district court for further proceedings. On July 23, 2020, the district
court denied the class plaintiffs’ motion for class certification, and on
December 16, 2020 the Second Circuit denied leave to appeal the denial. On
February 17, 2021, the district court granted defendants’ motion for summary
judgment with respect to the claims of most of the individual plaintiffs. On
April 14, 2021, the plaintiffs appealed to the Second Circuit Court of
Appeals.

In connection with the sale of Metro, the firm agreed to provide indemnities
to the buyer, including for any potential liabilities for legal or regulatory
proceedings arising out of the conduct of Metro’s business while the firm
owned it.

U.S. Treasury Securities Litigation

GS&Co. is among the primary dealers named as defendants in several putative
class actions relating to the market for U.S. Treasury securities, filed
beginning in July 2015 and consolidated in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York. GS&Co. is also among the primary dealers named
as defendants in a similar individual action filed in the U.S. District Court
for the Southern District of New York on August 25, 2017. The consolidated
class action complaint, filed on December 29, 2017, generally alleges that the
defendants violated antitrust laws in connection with an alleged conspiracy to
manipulate the when-issued market and auctions for U.S. Treasury securities
and that certain defendants, including GS&Co., colluded to preclude trading of
U.S. Treasury securities on electronic trading platforms in order to impede
competition in the bidding process. The individual action alleges a similar
conspiracy regarding manipulation of the when-issued market and auctions, as
well as related futures and options in violation of the Commodity Exchange
Act. The complaints seek declaratory and injunctive relief, treble damages in
an unspecified amount and restitution. Defendants’ motion to dismiss was
granted on March 31, 2021. On May 14, 2021, plaintiffs filed an amended
complaint. On June 14, 2021, defendants filed a motion to dismiss the amended
complaint.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Corporate Bonds Antitrust Litigation

Group Inc. and GS&Co. are among the dealers named as defendants in a putative
class action relating to the secondary market for

odd-lot

corporate bonds, filed on April 21, 2020 in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York. The amended consolidated complaint, filed on
October 29, 2020, asserts claims under federal antitrust law in connection
with alleged anti-competitive conduct by the defendants in the secondary
market for

odd-lots

of corporate bonds, and seeks declaratory and injunctive relief, as well as
unspecified monetary damages, including treble and punitive damages and
restitution. On October 25, 2021, the court granted defendants’ motion to
dismiss with prejudice. On November 23, 2021, plaintiffs appealed to the
Second Circuit Court of Appeals.

Credit Default Swap Antitrust Litigation

Group Inc., GS&Co. and GSI are among the defendants named in a putative
antitrust class action relating to the settlement of credit default swaps,
filed on June 30, 2021 in the U.S. District Court for the District of New
Mexico. The complaint generally asserts claims under federal antitrust law and
the Commodity Exchange Act in connection with an alleged conspiracy among the
defendants to manipulate the benchmark price used to value credit default
swaps for settlement. The complaint also asserts a claim for unjust enrichment
under state common law. The complaint seeks declaratory and injunctive relief,
as well as unspecified amounts of treble and other damages. On November 15,
2021, the defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint. On February 4,
2022, the plaintiffs filed an amended complaint.

Employment-Related Matters

On September 15, 2010, a putative class action was filed in the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of New York by three female former employees.
The complaint, as subsequently amended, alleges that Group Inc. and GS&Co.
have systematically discriminated against female employees in respect of
compensation, promotion and performance evaluations. The complaint alleges a
class consisting of all female employees employed at specified levels in
specified areas by Group Inc. and GS&Co. since July 2002, and asserts claims
under federal and New York City discrimination laws. The complaint seeks class
action status, injunctive relief and unspecified amounts of compensatory,
punitive and other damages.

On March 30, 2018, the district court certified a damages class as to the
plaintiffs’ disparate impact and treatment claims. On September 4, 2018, the
Second Circuit Court of Appeals denied defendants’ petition for interlocutory
review of the district court’s class certification decision and subsequently
denied defendants’ petition for rehearing. On September 27, 2018, plaintiffs
advised the district court that they would not seek to certify a class for
injunctive and declaratory relief. On March 26, 2020, the Magistrate Judge in
the district court granted in part a motion to compel arbitration as to class
members who are parties to certain agreements with Group Inc. and/or GS&Co. in
which they agreed to arbitrate employment-related disputes. On April 16, 2020,
plaintiffs submitted objections to the Magistrate Judge’s order and defendants
submitted conditional objections in the event that the district judge
overturned any portion of the Magistrate Judge’s order. On July 22, 2021,
defendants filed a motion to decertify the class. On August 9, 2021,
plaintiffs filed a motion for partial summary judgment as to a portion of a
disparate impact claim, and defendants filed a motion for summary judgment as
to plaintiff’s disparate impact and treatment claims. On September 15, 2021,
the district court affirmed the decision of the Magistrate Judge to compel
arbitration.

Communications Recordkeeping Investigation and Review

The firm is cooperating with the SEC and producing documents in connection
with an investigation of the firm’s compliance with records preservation
requirements relating to business communications sent over electronic
messaging channels that have not been approved by the firm. The SEC has stated
that it is conducting similar investigations of record preservation practices
at other financial institutions.

Regulatory Investigations and Reviews and Related Litigation

Group Inc. and certain of its affiliates are subject to a number of other
investigations and reviews by, and in some cases have received subpoenas and
requests for documents and information from, various governmental and
regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations and litigation and
shareholder requests relating to various matters relating to the firm’s
businesses and operations, including:

The securities offering process and underwriting practices;  

The firm’s investment management and financial advisory services;  

Conflicts of interest;  

Research practices, including research independence and interactions between
research analysts and other firm personnel, including investment banking
personnel, as well as third parties;  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Transactions involving government-related financings and other matters,
municipal securities, including wall-cross procedures and conflict of interest
disclosure with respect to state and municipal clients, the trading and
structuring of municipal derivative instruments in connection with municipal
offerings, political contribution rules, municipal advisory services and the
possible impact of credit default swap transactions on municipal issuers;  

Consumer lending, as well as residential mortgage lending, servicing and
securitization, and compliance with related consumer laws;  

The offering, auction, sales, trading and clearance of corporate and
government securities, currencies, commodities and other financial products
and related sales and other communications and activities, as well as the
firm’s supervision and controls relating to such activities, including
compliance with applicable short sale rules, algorithmic, high-frequency and
quantitative trading, the firm’s U.S. alternative trading system (dark pool),
futures trading, options trading, when-issued trading, transaction reporting,
technology systems and controls, communications recordkeeping and recording,
securities lending practices, prime brokerage activities, trading and
clearance of credit derivative instruments and interest rate swaps,
commodities activities and metals storage, private placement practices,
allocations of and trading in securities, and trading activities and
communications in connection with the establishment of benchmark rates, such
as currency rates;  

Compliance with the FCPA;  

The firm’s hiring and compensation practices;  

The firm’s system of risk management and controls; and  

Insider trading, the potential misuse and dissemination of material nonpublic
information regarding corporate and governmental developments and the
effectiveness of the firm’s insider trading controls and information barriers.  

The firm is cooperating with all such governmental and regulatory
investigations and reviews.

Note 28.

Employee Benefit Plans

The firm sponsors various pension plans and certain other postretirement
benefit plans, primarily healthcare and life insurance. The firm also provides
certain benefits to former or inactive employees prior to retirement.

Defined Benefit Pension Plans and Postretirement Plans

Employees of certain

non-U.S.

subsidiaries participate in various defined benefit pension plans. These plans
generally provide benefits based on years of credited service and a percentage
of eligible compensation. The firm maintains a defined benefit pension plan
for certain U.K. employees. As of April 2008, the U.K. defined benefit plan
was closed to new participants and frozen for existing participants as of
March 31, 2016. The

non-U.S.

plans do not have a material impact on the firm’s consolidated results of
operations.

The firm also maintains a defined benefit pension plan for substantially all
U.S. employees hired prior to November 1, 2003. As of November 2004, this plan
was closed to new participants and frozen for existing participants. In
addition, the firm maintains unfunded postretirement benefit plans that
provide medical and life insurance for eligible retirees and their dependents
covered under these programs. These plans do not have a material impact on the
firm’s consolidated results of operations.

The firm recognizes the funded status of its defined benefit pension and
postretirement plans, measured as the difference between the fair value of the
plan assets and the benefit obligation, in the consolidated balance sheets. As
of December 2021, other assets included $411 million (related to overfunded
pension plans) and other liabilities included $426 million related to these
plans. As of December 2020, other assets included $343 million (related to
overfunded pension plans) and other liabilities included $478 million related
to these plans.

Defined Contribution Plans

The firm contributes to employer-sponsored U.S. and

non-U.S.

defined contribution plans. The firm’s contribution to these plans was $274
million for 2021, $261 million for 2020 and $254 million for 2019.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 29.

Employee Incentive Plans

The cost of employee services received in exchange for a share-based award is
generally measured based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Share-
based awards that do not require future service (i.e., vested awards,
including awards granted to retirement-eligible employees) are expensed
immediately. Share-based awards that require future service are amortized over
the relevant service period. Forfeitures are recorded when they occur.

Cash dividend equivalents paid on RSUs are generally charged to retained
earnings. If RSUs that require future service are forfeited, the related
dividend equivalents originally charged to retained earnings are reclassified
to compensation expense in the period in which forfeiture occurs.

The firm generally issues new shares of common stock upon delivery of share-
based awards. In certain cases, primarily related to conflicted employment (as
outlined in the applicable award agreements), the firm may cash settle share-
based compensation awards accounted for as equity instruments. For these
awards, whose terms allow for cash settlement, additional

paid-in

capital is adjusted to the extent of the difference between the value of the
award at the time of cash settlement and the grant-date value of the award.

Stock Incentive Plan

The firm sponsors a stock incentive plan, The Goldman Sachs Amended and
Restated Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (2021 SIP), which provides for grants of
RSUs, restricted stock, dividend equivalent rights, incentive stock options,
nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, and other share-based
awards, each of which may be subject to terms and conditions, including
performance or market conditions. On April 29, 2021, shareholders approved the
2021 SIP. The 2021 SIP is a successor to several predecessor stock incentive
plans, the first of which was adopted on April 30, 1999, and each of which was
approved by the firm’s shareholders.

As of December 2021, 69.8 million shares were available to be delivered
pursuant to awards granted under the 2021 SIP. If any shares of common stock
underlying awards granted under the 2021 SIP or awards granted under the 2018,
2015 or 2013 predecessor stock incentive plans are not delivered because such
awards are forfeited, terminated or canceled, or if shares of common stock
underlying such awards are surrendered or withheld to satisfy any obligation
of the grantee (including taxes), those shares will become available to be
delivered pursuant to awards granted under the 2021 SIP. Shares available to
be delivered under the 2021 SIP also are subject to adjustment for certain
events or changes in corporate structure as provided under the 2021 SIP. The
2021 SIP is scheduled to terminate on the date of the annual meeting of
shareholders that occurs in 2025.

Restricted Stock Units

The firm grants RSUs (including RSUs subject to performance or market
conditions) to employees, which are generally valued based on the closing
price of the underlying shares on the date of grant after taking into account
a liquidity discount for any applicable post-vesting and delivery transfer
restrictions. The value of equity awards also considers the impact of material
non-public information, if any, that the firm expects to make available
shortly following grant. RSUs generally vest and underlying shares of common
stock deliver (net of required withholding tax) as outlined in the applicable
award agreements. Award agreements generally provide that vesting is
accelerated in certain circumstances, such as on retirement, death, disability
and, in certain cases, conflicted employment. Delivery of the underlying
shares of common stock is conditioned on the grantees satisfying certain
vesting and other requirements outlined in the award agreements. RSUs not
subject to performance conditions generally

vest

and

deliver over a three-year period.

RSUs

that are subject to performance or market conditions generally deliver after
the end of a three to five year period. For awards that are subject to
performance or market conditions, generally the final award is adjusted from

zero up to 150% of the original grant based on satisfaction of those
conditions. Dividend equivalents that accrue on these awards are paid when the
awards settle.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

The table below presents the 2021 activity related to stock settled RSUs.

In the table above:

In relation to

2021 year-end,

during the first quarter of 2022, the firm granted to its employees
approximately 12 million RSUs (of which 4.4 million RSUs require future
service as a condition of delivery for the related shares of common stock) and
delivered, net of required withholding tax, approximately 1 million shares of
restricted stock (which do not require future service). Both RSU and
restricted stock awards are subject to additional conditions as outlined in
the award agreements. Generally, shares underlying these RSUs, net of required
withholding tax, deliver over a three-year period, but are subject to a one-
year post-vesting and delivery transfer restriction. The restricted stock is
subject to a three-year post-vesting and delivery transfer restriction. These
awards are not included in the table above.

As of December 2021, there was $565 million of total unrecognized compensation
cost related to

non-vested

share-based compensation arrangements. This cost is expected to be recognized
over a weighted average period of 2.02 years. In addition, there is
unrecognized compensation cost related to share-based compensation
arrangements subject to performance conditions. The maximum payout related to
these awards is $31 million. This cost is expected to be recognized over a
weighted average period of two years.

The table below presents the share-based compensation and the related excess
tax benefit.

In the table above, excess net tax benefit for share-based awards includes the
net tax benefit on dividend equivalents paid on RSUs and the delivery of
common stock underlying share-based awards.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Note 30.

Parent Company

Group Inc. — Condensed Statements of Earnings

Supplemental Disclosures:

In the condensed statements of earnings above, revenues and expenses included
the following with subsidiaries and other affiliates:

Group Inc.’s other comprehensive income/(loss) was $(634) million for 2021,
$50 million for 2020 and $(2.18) billion for 2019.

Group Inc. — Condensed Balance Sheets

Supplemental Disclosures:

Goldman Sachs Funding LLC (Funding IHC), a wholly-owned, direct subsidiary of
Group Inc., has provided Group Inc. with a committed line of credit that
allows Group Inc. to draw sufficient funds to meet its cash needs in the
ordinary course of business.

Trading assets included derivative contracts with subsidiaries of $1.38
billion as of December 2021 and $843 million as of December 2020.

Trading liabilities included derivative contracts with subsidiaries of $1.12
billion as of December 2021 and $320 million as of December 2020.

As of December 2021, unsecured long-term borrowings with subsidiaries by
maturity date are $38.85 billion in 2023, $324 million in 2024, $385 million
in 2025, $45 million in 2026 and $798 million in 2027-thereafter.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

Group Inc. — Condensed Statements of Cash Flows

Supplemental Disclosures:

Cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $4.72 billion
for 2021, $5.92 billion for 2020 and $9.53 billion for 2019, and included
$1.33 billion for 2021, $1.90 billion for 2020 and $3.01 billion for 2019 of
payments to subsidiaries.

Cash payments/(refunds) for income taxes, net, were $3.74 billion for 2021,
$1.37 billion for 2020 and $272 million for 2019.

Non-cash

activities during the year ended December 2021:

Group Inc. exchanged $948 million of loans for additional equity investment in
its wholly-owned subsidiaries.  

Non-cash

activities during the year ended December 2020:

Group Inc. exchanged $11.2 million of Trust Preferred securities and common
beneficial interests for $12.5 million of certain of Group Inc.’s junior
subordinated debt.  

Non-cash

activities during the year ended December 2019:

Group Inc. acquired $8.50 billion of deposits with GS Bank USA from Funding
IHC in exchange for borrowings.  

Group Inc. exchanged $211 million of Trust Preferred securities and common
beneficial interests for $231 million of certain of Group Inc.’s junior
subordinated debt.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Supplemental Financial Information

Common Stock Performance

The graph and table below compare the performance of an investment in the
firm’s common stock from December 31, 2016 (the last trading day before the
firm’s 2017 fiscal year) through December 31, 2021, with the S&P 500 Index
(S&P 500) and the S&P 500 Financials Index (S&P 500 Financials).

The graph and table above assume $100 was invested on December 31, 2016 in
each of the firm’s common stock, the S&P 500 and the S&P 500 Financials, and
the dividends were reinvested without payment of any commissions. The
performance shown represents past performance and should not be considered an
indication of future performance.

Statistical Disclosures

Distribution of Assets, Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity

The tables below present information about average balances, interest and
average interest rates.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Supplemental Financial Information

In the tables above:

Assets, liabilities and interest are classified as U.S. and

non-U.S.

based on the location of the entity in which the assets and liabilities are
held.  

Derivative instruments and commodities are included in other

non-interest-earning

assets and other

non-interest-bearing

liabilities.  

Other interest-earning assets primarily consists of certain receivables from
customers and counterparties.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Supplemental Financial Information

Substantially all of the other interest-bearing liabilities consists of
certain payables to customers and counterparties.  

Interest rates for borrowings include the effects of interest rate swaps
accounted for as hedges.  

Loans exclude loans held for sale that are accounted for at the lower of cost
or fair value. Such loans are included within other interest-earning assets.  

Short- and long-term borrowings include both secured and unsecured borrowings.  

Changes in Net Interest Income, Volume and Rate Analysis

The tables below present the effect on net interest income of volume and rate
changes. In this analysis, changes due to volume/rate variance have been
allocated to volume.

Deposits

The table below presents information about interest-bearing deposits.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Supplemental Financial Information

In the table above, deposits are classified as U.S. and

non-U.S.

based on the location of the entity in which such deposits are held.

The amount of deposits in U.S. offices held by

non-U.S.

depositors was $7.56 billion as of December 2021 and $4.53 billion as of
December 2020.

The amount of uninsured deposits in U.S. offices was $127.05 billion as of
December 2021 and $83.33 billion as of December 2020. The amount of uninsured
deposits in

non-U.S.

offices was $49.08 billion as of December 2021 and $26.08 billion as of
December 2020.

The table below presents uninsured time deposits by maturity.

In the table above:

All U.S. time deposits were in accounts eligible for FDIC insurance and

non-U.S.

time deposits include deposits in accounts eligible for insurance in their
local jurisdictions, as well as deposits in uninsured accounts.  

The insurance limit is allocated between time and other deposits on a

pro-rata

basis for account holders who have both time and other deposits that, in
aggregate, exceed the insurance limit.  

Loan Portfolio

The table below presents information about loans.

Maturities and Interest Rates.

The table below presents gross loans by tenor.

The table below presents the gross loans by tenor and for loans with tenors
greater than one year, the distributions of such loans between fixed and
floating interest rates.

Allowance for Loan Losses

The table below presents information about the allowance for loan losses.

The table below presents information about the net

charge-off

ratio for loans accounted for at amortized cost.

In the table above, the net

charge-off

ratio is calculated by dividing the net charge-offs by average gross loans
accounted for at amortized cost. Net charge-offs for wholesale loans were
primarily related to corporate loans for both 2021 and 2020.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and
Financial Disclosure

There were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure during the last two years.

Item 9A. Controls and Procedures

As of the end of the period covered by this report, an evaluation was carried
out by Goldman Sachs management, with the participation of our Chief Executive
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in

Rule 13a-15(e)

under the Exchange Act). Based upon that evaluation, our Chief Executive
Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that these disclosure controls
and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this
report. In addition, no change in our internal control over financial
reporting (as defined in

Rule 13a-15(f)

under the Exchange Act) occurred during the fourth quarter of our year ended
December 31, 2021 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.

Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and the
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm are set forth in Part
II, Item 8 of this

Form 10-K.

Item 9B. Other Information

Not applicable.

Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections

Not applicable.

PART III

Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance

Information about our executive officers is included on page 25 of this

Form 10-K.

Information about our directors, including our audit committee and audit
committee financial experts and the procedures by which shareholders can
recommend director nominees, and our executive officers will be in our
definitive Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which
will be filed within 120 days of the end of 2021 (2022 Proxy Statement) and is
incorporated in this

Form 10-K

by reference. Information about our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, which
applies to our senior financial officers, is included in “Business — Available
Information” in Part I, Item 1 of this

Form 10-K.

Item 11. Executive Compensation

Information relating to our executive officer and director compensation and
the compensation committee of the Board will be in the 2022 Proxy Statement
and is incorporated in this

Form 10-K

by reference.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and
Related Stockholder Matters

Information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial owners of our
common stock and information relating to the security ownership of our
management will be in the 2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated in this

Form 10-K

by reference.

The table below presents information as of December 31, 2021 regarding
securities to be issued pursuant to outstanding restricted stock units (RSUs)
and securities remaining available for issuance under our equity compensation
plans that were in effect during 2021.

In the table above:

Securities to be Issued Upon Exercise of Outstanding Options and Rights
includes 20,288,851 shares that may be issued pursuant to outstanding RSUs.
These awards are subject to vesting and other conditions to the extent set
forth in the respective award agreements, and the underlying shares will be
delivered net of any required tax withholding. As of December 31, 2021, there
were no outstanding options.  

Shares underlying RSUs are deliverable without the payment of any
consideration, and therefore these awards have not been taken into account in
calculating the weighted average exercise price.  

Securities Available For Future Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
represents shares remaining to be issued under our current stock incentive
plan (SIP), excluding shares reflected in column (a). If any shares of common
stock underlying awards granted under our current SIP, our SIP adopted in
2018, our SIP adopted in 2015 or our SIP adopted in 2013 are not delivered due
to forfeiture, termination or cancellation or are surrendered or withheld,
those shares will again become available to be delivered under our current
SIP. Shares available for grant are also subject to adjustment for certain
changes in corporate structure as permitted under our current SIP.  

Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director
Independence

Information regarding certain relationships and related transactions and
director independence will be in the 2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated
in this

Form 10-K

by reference.

Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services

Information regarding principal accountant fees and services will be in the
2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated in this

Form 10-K

by reference.

PART IV

Item 15. Exhibit and Financial Statement Schedules

(a) Documents filed as part of this Report:

1. Consolidated Financial Statements

The consolidated financial statements required to be filed in this

Form 10-K

are included in Part II, Item 8 hereof.

2. Exhibits

Plan of Incorporation (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the
Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-1 (No.
 
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.,
amended as of November 10, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to
the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on November 10, 2021).

Amended and Restated By-Laws of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., amended as of
October 28, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021).

Description of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.’s Securities registered pursuant
to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. 
 
THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Indenture, dated as of May 19, 1999, between The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.
and The Bank of New York, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 6
to the Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A, filed on June 29,

Subordinated Debt Indenture, dated as of February 20, 2004, between The
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and The Bank of New York, as trustee (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended November 28, 2003).

Warrant Indenture, dated as of February 14, 2006, between The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and The Bank of New York, as trustee (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 4.34 to the Registrant’s Post-Effective Amendment No. 3 to Form S-3,
filed on March 1, 2006).

Senior Debt Indenture, dated as of December 4, 2007, among GS Finance Corp.,
as issuer, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., as guarantor, and The Bank of New
York, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.69 to the
Registrant’s Post-Effective Amendment No. 10 to Form S-3, filed on December 4,
 
Senior Debt Indenture, dated as of July 16, 2008, between The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and The Bank of New York Mellon, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 4.82 to the Registrant’s Post-Effective Amendment No. 11
to Form S-3 (No. 333-130074), filed on July 17,
 
Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 31, 2016, between The
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and The Bank of New York Mellon, as trustee, with
respect to the Senior Debt Indenture, dated as of July 16, 2008 (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K,
filed on January 6, 2017).

Senior Debt Indenture, dated as of October 10, 2008, among GS Finance Corp.,
as issuer, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., as guarantor, and The Bank of New
York Mellon, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.70 to the
Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 (No. 333-154173), filed on
October 10, 2008).

First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 20, 2015, among GS Finance
Corp., as issuer, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., as guarantor, and The Bank of
New York Mellon, as trustee, with respect to the Senior Debt Indenture, dated
as of October 10, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.7 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
 
Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 21, 2018, among GS Finance
Corp., as issuer, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., as guarantor, and The Bank of
New York Mellon, as trustee, with respect to the Senior Debt Indenture, dated
as of October 10, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30,

Ninth Supplemental Subordinated Debt Indenture, dated as of May 20, 2015,
between The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and The Bank of New York Mellon, as
trustee, with respect to the Subordinated Debt Indenture, dated as of February
20, 2004 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current
Report on Form 8-K, filed on May 22, 2015).

Tenth Supplemental Subordinated Debt Indenture, dated as of July 7, 2017,
between The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and The Bank of New York Mellon, as
trustee, with respect to the Subordinated Debt Indenture, dated as of February
20, 2004 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.89 to the Registrant’s
Registration Statement on Form S-3 (No. 333-219206), filed on July 10, 2017).

Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, among GS Finance
Corp., as issuer, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., as guarantor, and The Bank of
New York Mellon, as trustee, with respect to the Senior Debt Indenture, dated
as of October 10, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.69 to the
Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 (No. 333-239610), filed on
July 1,
 
Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 14, 2020, among GS Finance
Corp., as issuer, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., as guarantor, and The Bank of
New York Mellon, as trustee, with respect to the Senior Debt Indenture, dated
as of October 10, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on October 14, 2020).

Certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
securities of the Registrant and its subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to Item
601(b)(4)(iii) of

Regulation S-K.

The Registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the SEC, upon request, copies
of any such instruments.  

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

Form of Performance-Based Cash Compensation Award Agreement (pre-2015)
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K, filed on December 23, 2010).
 
Amended and Restated General Guarantee Agreement, dated November 21, 2011,
made by The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. relating to certain obligations of
Goldman Sachs Bank USA (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on November 21, 2011).

Form of Aircraft Time Sharing Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.61 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2011).
 
The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. Clawback Policy, effective as of January 1,
2015 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.53 to the Registrant’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
 
Form of Non-Employee Director RSU Award Agreement. † 
 
Form of One-Time/Year-End RSU Award Agreement. † 
 
Form of Year-End RSU Award Agreement (not fully vested). †

Form of Year-End RSU Award Agreement (fully vested). † 
 
Form of Year-End RSU Award Agreement (Base (not fully vested) and/or
Supplemental). †
 
Form of Year-End Short-Term RSU Award Agreement. † 
 
Form of Year-End Restricted Stock Award Agreement (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.46 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal
year ended December 31, 2020). †

Form of Year-End Restricted Stock Award Agreement (fully vested)
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.53 to the Registrant’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017). †

Form of Year-End Short-Term Restricted Stock Award Agreement (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.57 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015). †

Form of Fixed Allowance RSU Award Agreement (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.49 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal
year ended December 31, 2020).
 
Form of Fixed Allowance Restricted Stock Award Agreement (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.50 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020). †

Form of Fixed Allowance Deferred Cash Award Agreement (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.59 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015). †

Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (fully
vested). † 
 
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (not fully
vested). † 
 
Form of Performance-Based Cash Compensation Award Agreement (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.61 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015). †

Form of Signature Card for Equity Awards. † 
 
Amended and Restated General Guarantee Agreement, dated September 28, 2018,
made by The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. relating to certain obligations of
Goldman Sachs Bank USA (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on September 28,
 
Amended and Restated General Guarantee Agreement, dated September 28, 2018,
made by The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. relating to certain obligations of
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the
Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on September 28, 2018).

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES

SIGNATURES

Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.

T

HE

G

OLDMAN

S

ACHS

G

ROUP

, I

NC

By:

/s/

Denis P. Coleman III  

Denis P. Coleman III  

Title:

   Chief Financial Officer

Date:

February 24, 2022  

Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.

By:

/s/

David Solomon  

David Solomon  

Capacity:

   Director, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive

Officer)  

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

M. Michele Burns  

M. Michele Burns  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Drew G. Faust  

Drew G. Faust  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Mark A. Flaherty  

Mark A. Flaherty  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Kimberley D. Harris  

Kimberley D. Harris  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Ellen J. Kullman  

Ellen J. Kullman  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Lakshmi N. Mittal  

Lakshmi N. Mittal  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Adebayo O. Ogunlesi  

Adebayo O. Ogunlesi  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Peter Oppenheimer  

Peter Oppenheimer  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Jan E. Tighe  

Jan E. Tighe  

Capacity:

Director  

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Jessica R. Uhl  

Jessica R. Uhl  

Capacity:

Director  

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

David A. Viniar  

David A. Viniar  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Mark O. Winkelman  

Mark O. Winkelman  

Capacity:

   Director

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Denis P. Coleman III  

Denis P. Coleman III  

Capacity:

Chief Financial Officer

(Principal Financial Officer)  

Date:

February 24, 2022  

By:

/s/

Sheara J. Fredman  

Sheara J. Fredman  

Capacity:

Chief Accounting Officer

(Principal Accounting Officer)  

Date:

February 24, 2022EX-4.1 2 d192225dex41.htm EX-4.1  EX-4.1

Exhibit 4.1

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12 OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934

AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2021

The following is a description of each class of securities of The Goldman
Sachs Group, Inc. (the "Company") that is registered under Section 12 of the
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, as of December 31, 2021.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Description of Common Stock

Description of the Depositary Shares, Each Representing 1/1,000th Interest in
a Share of Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A

Description of the Depositary Shares, Each Representing 1/1,000th Interest in
a Share of Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series C

Description of the Depositary Shares, Each Representing 1/1,000th Interest in
a Share of Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series D

Description of the Depositary Shares, Each Representing 1/1,000th Interest in
a Share of 5.50% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series
J

Description of the Depositary Shares, Each Representing 1/1,000th Interest in
a Share of 6.375% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock,
Series K

Description of (i) 5.793% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Normal Automatic Preferred
Enhanced Capital Securities of Goldman Sachs Capital II (Fully and
Unconditionally Guaranteed by The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.) and (ii) Floating
Rate Normal Automatic Preferred Enhanced Capital Securities of Goldman Sachs
Capital III (Fully and Unconditionally Guaranteed by The Goldman Sachs Group,
Inc.)

Description of Medium-Term Notes, Series F, Callable Fixed and Floating Rate
Notes due 2031 of GS Finance Corp. (Fully and Unconditionally Guaranteed by
The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.)

Description of Medium-Term Notes, Series E, Index-Linked Notes due 2028 of GS
Finance Corp. (Fully and Unconditionally Guaranteed by The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc.)1

DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK

The following is a brief description of the material terms of the Company's
common stock. The following summary does not purport to be complete and is
qualified in its entirety by reference to the pertinent sections of the
Company's restated certificate of incorporation and the Company's amended and
restated by-laws, which are exhibits to the Annual Report of which this
exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all references to
the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.
and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries. 

Pursuant to the Company's restated certificate of incorporation, the Company's
authorized capital stock consists of 4,350,000,000 shares, each with a par
value of $0.01 per share, of which 4,000,000,000 shares are designated as
common stock and 200,000,000 shares are designated as nonvoting common stock.
All outstanding shares of common stock are validly issued, fully paid and
nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their purchase price in
full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender additional funds.

The Company's Shareholders' Agreement governs, among other things, the voting
of shares of common stock owned by participating managing directors of the
Company. Shares of common stock subject to the Company's Shareholders'
Agreement are called "voting shares." Before any of the Company's shareholders
vote, a separate, preliminary vote is held by the persons covered by the
Company's Shareholders' Agreement. In the election of directors, all voting
shares will be voted in favor of the election of the director nominees
receiving the highest numbers of votes cast by the covered persons in the
preliminary vote. For all other matters, all voting shares will be voted in
accordance with the majority of the votes cast by the covered persons in the
preliminary vote.

Common Stock

Each holder of common stock is entitled to one vote for each share owned of
record on all matters submitted to a vote of shareholders. There are no
cumulative voting rights. Accordingly, the holders of a plurality of the
shares of common stock voting in a contested election of directors can elect
all the directors if they choose to do so, subject to any voting rights of
holders of preferred stock to elect directors. In an uncontested director
election, a director must receive a majority of the votes cast for or against
the director to be elected.

Subject to the preferential rights of any holders of any outstanding series of
preferred stock, the holders of common stock, together with the holders of the
nonvoting common stock, are entitled to such dividends and distributions,
whether payable in cash or otherwise, as may be declared from time to time by
the Company's board of directors from legally available funds. Subject to the
preferential rights of holders of any outstanding series of preferred stock,
upon the Company's liquidation, dissolution or winding up and after payment of
all prior claims, the holders of common stock, with the shares of the common
stock and the nonvoting common stock being considered as a single class for
this purpose, will be entitled to receive pro rata all the Company's assets.
Holders of common stock have no redemption or conversion rights or preemptive
rights to purchase or subscribe for securities of the Company.

Nonvoting Common Stock

The nonvoting common stock has the same rights and privileges as, ranks
equally and shares proportionately with, and is identical in all respects as
to all matters to, the common stock, except that the nonvoting common stock
has no voting rights other than those voting rights required by law.

Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law

The Company is subject to the provisions of Section 203 of the Delaware
General Corporation Law. In general, Section 203 prohibits a publicly held
Delaware corporation from engaging in a "business combination" with an
"interested stockholder" for a period of three years after the date of the
transaction in which the person became an interested stockholder, unless the
business combination is approved in a prescribed manner. A "business
combination" includes a merger, asset sale or a transaction resulting in a
financial benefit to the interested stockholder. An "interested stockholder"
is a person who, together with affiliates and associates, owns (or, in certain
cases, within the preceding three years, did own) 15% or more of the
corporation's outstanding voting stock. Under Section 203, a business
combination between the Company and an interested stockholder is prohibited
unless it satisfies one of the following conditions:

prior to the stockholder becoming an interested stockholder, the board of
directors of the Company must have previously approved either the business
combination or the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an
interested stockholder;  

on consummation of the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming
an interested stockholder, the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of
the voting stock of the Company outstanding at the time the transaction
commenced, excluding, for purposes of determining the number of shares
outstanding (but not the outstanding voting stock owned by the interested
stockholder), those shares owned (i) by persons who are directors and also
officers and (ii) employee stock plans in which employee participants do not
have the right to determine confidentially whether shares held subject to the
plan will be tendered in a tender or exchange offer; or  

at or subsequent to such time the business combination is approved by the
board of directors and authorized at an annual or special meeting of
stockholders, and not by written consent, by the affirmative vote of at least
66 2/3% of the outstanding voting stock which is not owned by the interested
stockholder.  

The Company's board of directors has adopted a resolution providing that the
shareholders' agreement will not create an "interested stockholder."

Certain Anti-Takeover Matters

The Company's restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated
by-laws include a number of provisions that may have the effect of encouraging
persons considering unsolicited tender offers or other unilateral takeover
proposals to negotiate with the Company's board of directors rather than
pursue non-negotiated takeover attempts. These provisions include:

Constituency Provision

In accordance with the Company's restated certificate of incorporation, a
director of the Company may (but is not required to) in taking any action
(including an action that may involve or relate to a change or potential
change in control of the Company), consider, among other things, the effects
that the Company's actions may have on other interests or persons (including
its employees, former partners of The Goldman Sachs Group, L.P. and the
community) in addition to the Company's shareholders.

Advance Notice Requirements

The Company's amended and restated by-laws establish advance notice procedures
with regard to shareholder proposals relating to the nomination of candidates
for election as directors or new business to be brought before meetings of
shareholders of the Company. These procedures provide that notice of such
shareholder proposals must be timely given in writing to the Secretary of the
Company prior to the meeting at which the action is to be taken. The time
periods vary depending on the nature of the proposal. The notice must contain
certain information specified in the amended and restated by-laws and must
otherwise comply with the amended and restated by-laws.

Limitation on Ability of Shareholders to Call Special Meetings

The Company's restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated
by-laws provide procedures pursuant to which holders of record of not less
than 25% of the voting power of outstanding shares of the Company's common
stock may call a special meeting of shareholders. The Company's amended and
restated by-laws impose certain procedural requirements on shareholders
requesting such a meeting (including the provision of the same information
required for shareholder proposals at annual meetings under the Company's
advance notice by-law provisions described above), as well as qualifications
designed to prevent duplicative and unnecessary meetings.

No Written Consent of Shareholders

The Company's restated certificate of incorporation requires all shareholder
actions to be taken by a vote of the shareholders at an annual or special
meeting, and does not permit the Company's shareholders to act by written
consent without a meeting.

Blank Check Preferred Stock

The Company's restated certificate of incorporation provides for 150,000,000
authorized shares of preferred stock. The existence of authorized but unissued
shares of preferred stock may enable the board of directors to render more

difficult or to discourage an attempt to obtain control of the Company by
means of a merger, tender offer, proxy contest or otherwise. For example, if
in the due exercise of its fiduciary obligations, the board of directors were
to determine that a takeover proposal is not in the best interests of the
Company, the board of directors could cause shares of preferred stock to be
issued without shareholder approval in one or more private offerings or other
transactions that might dilute the voting or other rights of the proposed
acquiror or insurgent shareholder or shareholder group. In this regard, the
restated certificate of incorporation grants the Company's board of directors
broad power to establish the rights and preferences of authorized and unissued
shares of preferred stock. The issuance of shares of preferred stock could
decrease the amount of earnings and assets available for distribution to
holders of shares of common stock. The issuance may also adversely affect the
rights and powers, including voting rights, of such holders and may have the
effect of delaying, deterring or preventing a change in control of the
Company.

Listing

The common stock of the Company is listed on the NYSE under the ticker symbol
"GS."

DESCRIPTION OF THE DEPOSITARY SHARES, EACH REPRESENTING 1/1,000 TH INTEREST
IN A SHARE OF FLOATING RATE NON-CUMULATIVE PREFERRED STOCK, SERIES A 

DESCRIPTION OF SERIES A PREFERRED STOCK

The depositary is the sole holder of the Company's Floating Rate Non-
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A (the "Series A Preferred Stock"), and all
references herein to the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock shall mean
the depositary. However, the holders of depositary shares are entitled,
through the depositary, to exercise the rights and preferences of the holders
of the Series A Preferred Stock, as described below under "Description of
Depositary Shares." 

The following is a brief description of the material terms of the Series A
Preferred Stock. The following summary of the terms and provisions of the
Series A Preferred Stock does not purport to be complete and is qualified in
its entirety by reference to the pertinent sections of the Company's restated
certificate of incorporation, which is an exhibit to the Annual Report of
which this exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all
references to the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

General

The Company's authorized capital stock includes 150,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share. The Series A Preferred Stock is
part of a single series of the Company's authorized preferred stock. The
Company may from time to time, without notice to or the consent of holders of
the Series A Preferred Stock, issue additional shares of the Series A
Preferred Stock, up to the maximum number of authorized but unissued shares.

Shares of the Series A Preferred Stock rank senior to the Company's common
stock, equally with each other series of the Company's preferred stock
outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and at least equally to each other series
of preferred stock that the Company may issue (except for any senior series
that may be issued with the requisite consent of the holders of the Series A
Preferred Stock), with respect to the payment of dividends and distributions
of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up. In addition, the
Company will generally be able to pay dividends and distributions upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up only out of lawfully available funds
for such payment ( i.e. , after taking account of all indebtedness and other
non-equity claims). The Series A Preferred Stock is fully paid and
nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their purchase price in
full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender additional funds.
Holders of Series A Preferred Stock do not have preemptive or subscription
rights to acquire more stock of the Company.

The Series A Preferred Stock is not convertible into, or exchangeable for,
shares of any other class or series of stock or other securities of the
Company, except under certain limited circumstances described below under "-
Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy." The Series A Preferred Stock
has no stated maturity and is not subject to any sinking fund or other
obligation of the Company to redeem or repurchase the Series A Preferred
Stock. The Series A Preferred Stock represents non-withdrawable capital, is
not a bank deposit and is not insured by the FDIC or any other governmental
agency, nor is it the obligation of, or guaranteed by, a bank.

Dividends

Dividends on shares of the Series A Preferred Stock are not mandatory. Holders
of Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared
by the Company's board of directors or a duly authorized committee of the
board, out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends under
Delaware law, non-cumulative cash dividends from the original issue date,
quarterly in arrears on the 10th day of February, May, August and November of
each year (each, a "dividend payment date"). These dividends accrue, with
respect to each dividend period, on the liquidation preference amount of
$25,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) at a rate per annum
equal to the greater of (1) 0.75% above LIBOR (as described below) on the
related LIBOR determination date (as described below) or (2) 3.75%. In the
event that the Company issues additional shares of Series A Preferred Stock
after the original issue date, dividends on such shares may accrue from the
original issue date or any other date the Company specifies at the time such
additional shares are issued.

Dividends will be payable to holders of record of Series A Preferred Stock as
they appear on the Company's books on the applicable record date, which shall
be the 15th calendar day before that dividend payment date or such other
record date fixed by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) that is not more than 60 nor less than 10 days prior
to such dividend payment date (each, a "dividend record date"). These dividend
record dates will apply regardless of whether a particular dividend record
date is a business day. The corresponding record dates for the depositary
shares are the same as the record dates for the Series A Preferred Stock.

A dividend period is the period from and including a dividend payment date to
but excluding the next dividend payment date. Dividends payable on the Series
A Preferred Stock are computed on the basis of a 360-day year and the actual
number of days elapsed in the dividend period. If any date on which dividends
would otherwise be payable is not a business day, then the dividend payment
date will be the next succeeding business day unless such day falls in the
next calendar month, in which case the dividend payment date will be the
immediately preceding day that is a business day.

For any dividend period, LIBOR shall be determined by the calculation agent on
the second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
dividend period in the following manner:

LIBOR will be the offered rate per annum for three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such period, as that rate appears on
Moneyline Telerate Page 3750 as of 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second
London business day immediately preceding the first day of such dividend
period.  

If the rate described above does not appear on Moneyline Telerate page 3750,
LIBOR will be determined on the basis of the rates, at approximately 11:00
A.M., London time, on the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period, at which deposits of the following kind are
offered to prime banks in the London interbank market by four major banks in
that market selected by the calculation agent: three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a
Representative Amount. The calculation agent will request the principal London
office of each of these banks to provide a quotation of its rate. If at least
two quotations are provided, LIBOR for the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period will be the
arithmetic mean of the quotations.  

If fewer than two quotations are provided as described above, LIBOR for the
second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the rates for loans of the
following kind to leading European banks quoted, at approximately 11:00 A.M.
New York City time on the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period, by three major banks in New York City
selected by the calculation agent: three-month loans of U.S. dollars,
beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a Representative
Amount.  

If fewer than three banks selected by the calculation agent are quoting as
described above, LIBOR for the new dividend period will be LIBOR in effect for
the prior dividend period.  

The calculation agent's determination of any dividend rate, and its
calculation of the amount of dividends for any dividend period, will be on
file at the Company's principal offices, will be made available to any
stockholder upon request and will be final and binding in the absence of
manifest error.

This subsection uses several terms that have special meanings relevant to
calculating LIBOR. Those terms have the following meanings:

The term "Representative Amount" means an amount that, in the calculation
agent's judgment, is representative of a single transaction in the relevant
market at the relevant time.

The term "Moneyline Telerate Page" means the display on Moneyline Telerate,
Inc., or any successor service, on the page or pages specified herein or any
replacement page or pages on that service.

The term "business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday or Friday and is not a day on which banking institutions in New York
City generally are authorized or obligated by law or executive order to close.

The term "London business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is a day on which dealings in U.S. dollars
are transacted in the London interbank market.

Dividends on shares of Series A Preferred Stock are not cumulative.
Accordingly, if the board of directors of the Company, or a duly authorized
committee of the board, does not declare a dividend on the Series A Preferred
Stock payable in respect of any dividend period before the related dividend
payment date, such dividend will not accrue and the Company will have no
obligation to pay a dividend for that dividend period on the dividend payment
date or at any future time, whether or not dividends on the Series A Preferred
Stock are declared for any future dividend period.

So long as any share of Series A Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no
dividend shall be paid or declared on the Company's common stock or any other
shares of the Company's junior stock (as defined below) (other than a dividend
payable solely in junior stock), and no common stock or other junior stock
shall be purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for consideration by the
Company, directly or indirectly (other than as a result of a reclassification
of junior stock for or into other junior stock, or the exchange or conversion
of one share of junior stock for or into another share of junior stock and
other than through the use of the proceeds of a substantially contemporaneous
sale of junior stock), during a dividend period, unless the full dividends for
the latest completed dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series A
Preferred Stock have been declared and paid (or declared and a sum sufficient
for the payment thereof has been set aside). However, the foregoing provision
shall not restrict the ability of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or any of the
Company's other affiliates, to engage in any market-making transactions in the
Company's junior stock in the ordinary course of business.

As used in this description of the Series A Preferred Stock, "junior stock"
means any class or series of stock of the Company that ranks junior to the
Series A Preferred Stock either as to the payment of dividends or as to the
distribution of assets upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company. Junior stock includes the Company's common stock.

When dividends are not paid (or duly provided for) on any dividend payment
date (or, in the case of parity stock, as defined below, having dividend
payment dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the
Series A Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the
related dividend period for the Series A Preferred Stock) in full upon the
Series A Preferred Stock and any shares of parity stock, all dividends
declared upon the Series A Preferred Stock and all such equally ranking
securities payable on such dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity
stock having dividend payment dates different from the dividend payment dates
pertaining to the Series A Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling
within the related dividend period for the Series A Preferred Stock) shall be
declared pro rata so that the respective amounts of such dividends shall
bear the same ratio to each other as all accrued but unpaid dividends per
share on the Series A Preferred Stock and all parity stock payable on such
dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment
dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Series A
Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the related
dividend period for the Series A Preferred Stock) bear to each other.

As used in this description of the Series A Preferred Stock, "parity stock"
means any other class or series of stock of the Company that ranks equally
with the Series A Preferred Stock in the payment of dividends and in the
distribution of assets on any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company.

Subject to the foregoing, such dividends (payable in cash, stock or otherwise)
as may be determined by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) may be declared and paid on the Company's common stock
and any other stock ranking equally with or junior to the Series A Preferred
Stock from time to time out of any funds legally available for such payment,
and the shares of the Series A Preferred Stock shall not be entitled to
participate in any such dividend.

Liquidation Rights

Upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
the Company, holders of the Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to receive
out of assets of the Company available for distribution to stockholders, after
satisfaction of liabilities to creditors, if any, before any distribution of
assets is made to holders of common stock or of any of the Company's other
shares of stock ranking junior as to such a distribution to the shares of
Series A Preferred Stock, a liquidating distribution in the amount of $25,000
per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) plus declared and unpaid
dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. Holders of the
Series A Preferred Stock will not be entitled to any other amounts from the
Company after they have received their full liquidation preference.

In any such distribution, if the assets of the Company are not sufficient to
pay the liquidation preferences in full to all holders of the Series A
Preferred Stock and all holders of any other shares of the Company's stock
ranking equally as to such distribution with the Series A Preferred Stock, the
amounts paid to the holders of Series A Preferred Stock and to the holders of
all such other stock will be paid pro rata in accordance with the respective
aggregate liquidation

preferences of those holders. In any such distribution, the "liquidation
preference" of any holder of preferred stock means the amount payable to such
holder in such distribution, including any declared but unpaid dividends (and
any unpaid, accrued cumulative dividends in the case of any holder of stock on
which dividends accrue on a cumulative basis). If the liquidation preference
has been paid in full to all holders of Series A Preferred Stock, the holders
of the Company's other stock shall be entitled to receive all remaining assets
of the Company according to their respective rights and preferences.

For purposes of this description of the Series A Preferred Stock, the merger
or consolidation of the Company with any other entity, including a merger or
consolidation in which the holders of Series A Preferred Stock receive cash,
securities or property for their shares, or the sale, lease or exchange of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company for cash, securities or
other property shall not constitute a liquidation, dissolution or winding up
of the Company.

Redemption

The Series A Preferred Stock is not subject to any mandatory redemption,
sinking fund or other similar provisions. The Series A Preferred Stock is
currently redeemable at the Company's option, in whole or in part, upon not
less than 30 nor more than 60 days' notice, at a redemption price equal to
$25,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share), plus declared and
unpaid dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. Holders of
Series A Preferred Stock have no right to require the redemption or repurchase
of the Series A Preferred Stock.

If shares of the Series A Preferred Stock are to be redeemed, the notice of
redemption shall be given by first-class mail to the holders of record of the
Series A Preferred Stock to be redeemed, mailed not less than 30 days nor more
than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption thereof ( provided that,
if the depositary shares representing the Series A Preferred Stock are held in
book-entry form through The Depository Trust Company, or "DTC," the Company
may give such notice in any manner permitted by the DTC). Each notice of
redemption will include a statement setting forth: (i) the redemption date,
(ii) the number of shares of the Series A Preferred Stock to be redeemed and,
if less than all the shares held by such holder are to be redeemed, the number
of such shares to be redeemed from such holder, (iii) the redemption price and
(iv) the place or places where holders may surrender certificates evidencing
shares of Series A Preferred Stock for payment of the redemption price. If
notice of redemption of any shares of Series A Preferred Stock has been given
and if the funds necessary for such redemption have been set aside by the
Company for the benefit of the holders of any shares of Series A Preferred
Stock so called for redemption, then, from and after the redemption date,
dividends will cease to accrue on such shares of Series A Preferred Stock,
such shares of Series A Preferred Stock shall no longer be deemed outstanding
and all rights of the holders of such shares will terminate, except the right
to receive the redemption price.

In case of any redemption of only part of the shares of the Series A Preferred
Stock at the time outstanding, the shares to be redeemed shall be selected
either pro rata or in such other manner as the Company may determine to be
fair and equitable.

See "Description of Depositary Shares" below for information about redemption
of the depositary shares relating to the Company's Series A Preferred Stock.

Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy

The SEC had previously approved the application of the Company and Goldman
Sachs & Co. LLC to be supervised by the SEC as a consolidated supervised
entity ("CSE") pursuant to the SEC's rules at that time relating to CSEs
(referred to as the "CSE Rules"). The Company treated the Series A Preferred
Stock as allowable capital in accordance with the CSE Rules (such capital is
referred to below as "Allowable Capital").

If the regulatory capital requirements that apply to the Company change in the
future, the Series A Preferred Stock may be converted, at the Company's option
and without consent of the holders, into a new series of preferred stock,
subject to the limitations described below. The Company will be entitled to
exercise this conversion right as follows.

If both of the following occur:

the Company (by election or otherwise) becomes subject to any law, rule,
regulation or guidance (together, "regulations") relating to the Company's
capital adequacy, which regulation (i) modifies the existing requirements for
treatment as Allowable Capital, (ii) provides for a type or level of capital
characterized as "Tier 1" or its equivalent pursuant to regulations of any
governmental body  

having jurisdiction over the Company (or any of the Company's subsidiaries or
consolidated affiliates) and implementing capital standards published by the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the SEC, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (the "Federal Reserve Board") or any other United
States national governmental body, or any other applicable regime based on
capital standards published by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision or
its successor, or (iii) provides for a type of capital that in the Company's
judgment (after consultation with counsel of recognized standing) is
substantially equivalent to such "Tier 1" capital (such capital described in
either (ii) or (iii) is referred to below as "Tier 1 Capital Equivalent"), and  

the Company affirmatively elects to qualify the Series A Preferred Stock for
such Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent treatment without any
sublimit or other quantitative restriction on the inclusion of the Series A
Preferred Stock in Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent (other than
any limitation the Company elects to accept and any limitation requiring that
common equity or a specified form of common equity constitute the dominant
form of Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent) under such
regulations,  

then, upon such affirmative election, the Series A Preferred Stock shall be
convertible at the Company's option into a new series of preferred stock
having terms and provisions substantially identical to those of the Series A
Preferred Stock, except that such new series may have such additional or
modified rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers, and such
limitations and restrictions thereof, as are necessary, in the Company's
judgment (after consultation with counsel of recognized standing), to comply
with the Required Unrestricted Capital Provisions (defined below), provided
that the Company will not cause any such conversion unless the Company
determines that the rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers of such
new series of preferred stock, taken as a whole, are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series A Preferred Stock, taken as a whole. For example,
the Company could agree to restrict its ability to pay dividends on or redeem
the new series of preferred stock for a specified period or indefinitely, to
the extent permitted by the terms and provisions of the new series of
preferred stock, since such a restriction would be permitted in the Company's
discretion under the terms and provisions of the Series A Preferred Stock.

The Company will provide notice to holders of the Series A Preferred Stock of
any election to qualify the Series A Preferred Stock for Allowable Capital or
Tier 1 Capital Equivalent treatment and of any determination to convert the
Series A Preferred Stock into a new series of preferred stock, promptly upon
the effectiveness of any such election or determination. A copy of any such
notice and of the relevant regulations will be on file at the Company's
principal offices and, upon request, will be made available to any
stockholder.

As used above, the term "Required Unrestricted Capital Provisions" means the
terms that are, in the Company's judgment (after consultation with counsel of
recognized standing), required for preferred stock to be treated as Allowable
Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent, as applicable, without any sublimit or
other quantitative restriction on the inclusion of such preferred stock in
Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent (other than any limitation the
Company elects to accept and any limitation requiring that common equity or a
specified form of common equity constitute the dominant form of Allowable
Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent) pursuant to applicable regulations.

Voting Rights

Except as provided below, the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock have no
voting rights.

Whenever dividends on any shares of the Series A Preferred Stock shall have
not been declared and paid for the equivalent of six or more dividend
payments, whether or not for consecutive dividend periods (as used in this
section, a "Nonpayment"), the holders of such shares, voting together as a
class with holders of any and all other series of voting preferred stock (as
defined below) then outstanding, will be entitled to vote for the election of
a total of two additional members of the Company's board of directors (as used
in this section, the "Preferred Stock Directors"), provided that the
election of any such directors shall not cause the Company to violate the
corporate governance requirement of the New York Stock Exchange (or any other
exchange on which the Company's securities may be listed) that listed
companies must have a majority of independent directors. In that event, the
number of directors on the Company's board of directors shall automatically
increase by two, and the new directors shall be elected at a special meeting
called at the request of the holders of record of at least 20% of the Series A
Preferred Stock or of any other series of voting preferred stock (unless such
request is received less than 90 days before the date fixed for the next
annual or special meeting of the stockholders, in which event such election
shall be held at such next annual or special meeting of stockholders), and at
each subsequent annual meeting. These voting rights will continue until
dividends on the shares of the Series A Preferred Stock and any such series of
voting preferred stock for at least four dividend periods, whether or not
consecutive, following the Nonpayment shall have been fully paid (or declared
and a sum sufficient for the payment of such dividends shall have been set
aside for payment).

As used in this description of the Series A Preferred Stock, "voting preferred
stock" means any other class or series of preferred stock of the Company
ranking equally with the Series A Preferred Stock either as to dividends or
the distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up and
upon which like voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable. Whether
a plurality, majority or other portion of the shares of Series A Preferred
Stock and any other voting preferred stock have been voted in favor of any
matter shall be determined by reference to the liquidation amounts of the
shares voted.

If and when dividends for at least four dividend periods, whether or not
consecutive, following a Nonpayment have been paid in full (or declared and a
sum sufficient for such payment shall have been set aside), the holders of the
Series A Preferred Stock shall be divested of the foregoing voting rights
(subject to revesting in the event of each subsequent Nonpayment) and, if such
voting rights for all other holders of voting preferred stock have terminated,
the term of office of each Preferred Stock Director so elected shall terminate
and the number of directors on the board of directors shall automatically
decrease by two. In determining whether dividends have been paid for four
dividend periods following a Nonpayment, the Company may take account of any
dividend the Company elects to pay for such a dividend period after the
regular dividend date for that period has passed. Any Preferred Stock Director
may be removed at any time without cause by the holders of record of a
majority of the outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred Stock when they
have the voting rights described above (voting together as a class with all
series of voting preferred stock then outstanding). So long as a Nonpayment
shall continue, any vacancy in the office of a Preferred Stock Director (other
than prior to the initial election after a Nonpayment) may be filled by the
written consent of the Preferred Stock Director remaining in office, or if
none remains in office, by a vote of the holders of record of a majority of
the outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock when they have the voting
rights described above (voting together as a class with all series of voting
preferred stock then outstanding). The Preferred Stock Directors shall each be
entitled to one vote per director on any matter.

So long as any shares of Series A Preferred Stock remain outstanding, the
Company will not, without the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at
least two-thirds of the outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred Stock and
all other series of voting preferred stock entitled to vote thereon, voting
together as a single class, given in person or by proxy, either in writing or
at a meeting:

amend or alter the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to authorize or create, or increase the authorized amount
of, any class or series of stock ranking senior to the Series A Preferred
Stock with respect to payment of dividends or the distribution of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;  

amend, alter or repeal the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect the special rights,
preferences, privileges and voting powers of the Series A Preferred Stock,
taken as a whole; or  

consummate a binding share exchange or reclassification involving the Series A
Preferred Stock or a merger or consolidation of the Company with another
entity, unless in each case (i) the shares of Series A Preferred Stock remain
outstanding or, in the case of any such merger or consolidation with respect
to which the Company is not the surviving or resulting entity, are converted
into or exchanged for preference securities of the surviving or resulting
entity or its ultimate parent, and (ii) such shares remaining outstanding or
such preference securities, as the case may be, have such rights, preferences,
privileges and voting powers, taken as a whole, as are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series A Preferred Stock, taken as a whole;  

provided, however , that any increase in the amount of the authorized or
issued Series A Preferred Stock or authorized preferred stock or the creation
and issuance, or an increase in the authorized or issued amount, of other
series of preferred stock ranking equally with and/or junior to the Series A
Preferred Stock with respect to the payment of dividends (whether such
dividends are cumulative or non-cumulative) and/or the distribution of assets
upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company will not be deemed
to adversely affect the special rights, preferences, privileges or voting
powers of the Series A Preferred Stock. In addition, any conversion of the
Series A Preferred Stock upon the occurrence of certain regulatory events, as
discussed above under "- Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy,"
will not be deemed to adversely affect the special rights, preferences,
privileges or voting powers of the Series A Preferred Stock.

If an amendment, alteration, repeal, share exchange, reclassification, merger
or consolidation described above would adversely affect one or more but not
all series of voting preferred stock (including the Series A Preferred Stock
for this purpose), then only the series affected and entitled to vote shall
vote as a class in lieu of all such series of preferred stock.

Without the consent of the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock, so long as
such action does not adversely affect the special rights, preferences,
privileges and voting powers of the Series A Preferred Stock, taken as a
whole, the Company may amend, alter, supplement or repeal any terms of the
Series A Preferred Stock:

to cure any ambiguity, or to cure, correct or supplement any provision
contained in the certificate of designation for the Series A Preferred Stock
that may be defective or inconsistent; or  

to make any provision with respect to matters or questions arising with
respect to the Series A Preferred Stock that is not inconsistent with the
provisions of the certificate of designations.  

The foregoing voting provisions will not apply if, at or prior to the time
when the act with respect to which such vote would otherwise be required shall
be effected, all outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock shall have
been redeemed or called for redemption upon proper notice and sufficient funds
shall have been set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of the
Series A Preferred Stock to effect such redemption.

DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES

Please note that as used in this section, references to "holders" of
depositary shares mean those who own depositary shares registered in their own
names, on the books that the Company or the depositary maintain for this
purpose, and not indirect holders who own beneficial interests in depositary
shares registered in street name or issued in book-entry form through The
Depository Trust Company.

General

The Company has issued fractional interests in shares of preferred stock in
the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th ownership
interest in a share of Series A Preferred Stock and evidenced by a depositary
receipt. The shares of Series A Preferred Stock represented by depositary
shares are deposited under a deposit agreement among the Company, the
depositary and the holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
evidencing the depositary shares. Subject to the terms of the deposit
agreement, each holder of a depositary share is entitled, through the
depositary, in proportion to the applicable fraction of a share of Series A
Preferred Stock represented by such depositary share, to all the rights and
preferences of the Series A Preferred Stock represented thereby (including
dividend, voting, redemption and liquidation rights).

Dividends and Other Distributions

The depositary will distribute any cash dividends or other cash distributions
received in respect of the deposited Series A Preferred Stock to the record
holders of depositary shares relating to the underlying Series A Preferred
Stock in proportion to the number of depositary shares held by the holders.
The depositary will distribute any property received by it other than cash to
the record holders of depositary shares entitled to those distributions,
unless it determines that the distribution cannot be made proportionally among
those holders or that it is not feasible to make a distribution. In that
event, the depositary may, with the Company's approval, sell the property and
distribute the net proceeds from the sale to the holders of the depositary
shares in proportion to the number of depositary shares they hold.

Record dates for the payment of dividends and other matters relating to the
depositary shares will be the same as the corresponding record dates for the
Series A Preferred Stock.

The amounts distributed to holders of depositary shares will be reduced by any
amounts required to be withheld by the depositary or by the Company on account
of taxes or other governmental charges.

Redemption of Depositary Shares

If the Company redeems the Series A Preferred Stock represented by the
depositary shares, the depositary shares will be redeemed from the proceeds
received by the depositary resulting from the redemption of the Series A
Preferred Stock held by the depositary. The redemption price per depositary
share will be equal to 1/1,000th of the redemption price per share payable
with respect to the Series A Preferred Stock (or $25 per depositary share).
Whenever the Company redeems shares of Series A Preferred Stock held by the
depositary, the depositary will redeem, as of the same redemption date, the
number of depositary shares representing shares of Series A Preferred Stock so
redeemed.

In case of any redemption of less than all of the outstanding depositary
shares, the depositary shares to be redeemed will be selected by the
depositary pro rata or in such other manner determined by the depositary to
be equitable. In any such case, the Company will redeem depositary shares only
in increments of 1,000 shares and any multiple thereof.

Voting the Series A Preferred Stock

When the depositary receives notice of any meeting at which the holders of the
Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to vote, the depositary will mail the
information contained in the notice to the record holders of the depositary
shares relating to the Series A Preferred Stock. Each record holder of the
depositary shares on the record date, which will be the same date as the
record date for the Series A Preferred Stock, may instruct the depositary to
vote the amount of the Series A Preferred Stock represented by the holder's
depositary shares. To the extent possible, the depositary will vote the amount
of the Series A Preferred Stock represented by depositary shares in accordance
with the instructions it receives. The Company will agree to take all
reasonable actions that the depositary determines are necessary to enable the
depositary to vote as instructed. If the depositary does not receive specific
instructions from the holders of any depositary shares representing the Series
A Preferred Stock, it will vote all depositary shares of that series held by
it proportionately with instructions received.

Listing

The depositary shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the
ticker symbol "GS PrA."

Form of Preferred Stock and Depositary Shares

The depositary shares are issued in book-entry form through The Depository
Trust Company. The Series A Preferred Stock is issued in registered form to
the depositary.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DEPOSITARY SHARES, EACH REPRESENTING 1/1,000 TH INTEREST
IN A SHARE OF FLOATING RATE NON-CUMULATIVE PREFERRED STOCK, SERIES C 

DESCRIPTION OF SERIES C PREFERRED STOCK

The depositary is the sole holder of the Company's Floating Rate Non-
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series C (the "Series C Preferred Stock"), and all
references herein to the holders of the Series C Preferred Stock shall mean
the depositary. However, the holders of depositary shares are entitled,
through the depositary, to exercise the rights and preferences of the holders
of the Series C Preferred Stock, as described below under "Description of
Depositary Shares." 

The following is a brief description of the material terms of the Series C
Preferred Stock. The following summary of the terms and provisions of the
Series C Preferred Stock does not purport to be complete and is qualified in
its entirety by reference to the pertinent sections of the Company's restated
certificate of incorporation, which is an exhibit to the Annual Report of
which this exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all
references to the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

General

The Company's authorized capital stock includes 150,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share. The Series C Preferred Stock is
part of a single series of the Company's authorized preferred stock. The
Company may from time to time, without notice to or the consent of holders of
the Series C Preferred Stock, issue additional shares of the Series C
Preferred Stock, up to the maximum number of authorized but unissued shares.

Shares of the Series C Preferred Stock rank senior to the Company's common
stock, equally with each other series of the Company's preferred stock
outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and at least equally with each other
series of preferred stock that the Company may issue (except for any senior
series that may be issued with the requisite consent of the holders of the
Series C Preferred Stock), with respect to the payment of dividends and
distributions of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up. In
addition, the Company will generally be able to pay dividends and
distributions upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up only out of lawfully
available funds for such payment ( i.e. , after taking account of all
indebtedness and other non-equity claims). The Series C Preferred Stock is
fully paid and nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their
purchase price in full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender
additional funds. Holders of Series C Preferred Stock do not have preemptive
or subscription rights to acquire more stock of the Company.

The Series C Preferred Stock is not convertible into, or exchangeable for,
shares of any other class or series of stock or other securities of the
Company, except under certain limited circumstances described below under "-
Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy." The Series C Preferred Stock
has no stated maturity and is not subject to any sinking fund or other
obligation of the Company to redeem or repurchase the Series C Preferred
Stock. The Series C Preferred Stock represents non-withdrawable capital, is
not a bank deposit and is not insured by the FDIC or any other governmental
agency, nor is it the obligation of, or guaranteed by, a bank.

Dividends

Dividends on shares of the Series C Preferred Stock are not mandatory. Holders
of Series C Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared
by the Company's board of directors or a duly authorized committee of the
board, out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends under
Delaware law, non-cumulative cash dividends from the original issue date,
quarterly in arrears on the 10th day of February, May, August, and November of
each year (each, a "dividend payment date"). These dividends accrue, with
respect to each dividend period, on the liquidation preference amount of
$25,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) at a rate per annum
equal to the greater of (1) 0.75% above LIBOR (as described below) on the
related LIBOR determination date (as described below) or (2) 4.00%. In the
event that the Company issues additional shares of Series C Preferred Stock
after the original issue date, dividends on such shares may accrue from the
original issue date or any other date the Company specifies at the time such
additional shares are issued.

Dividends will be payable to holders of record of Series C Preferred Stock as
they appear on the Company's books on the applicable record date, which shall
be the 15th calendar day before that dividend payment date or such other
record date fixed by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) that is not more than 60 nor less than 10 days prior
to such dividend payment date (each, a "dividend record date"). These dividend
record dates will apply regardless of whether a particular dividend record
date is a business day. The corresponding record dates for the depositary
shares are the same as the record dates for the Series C Preferred Stock.

A dividend period is the period from and including a dividend payment date to
but excluding the next dividend payment date. Dividends payable on the Series
C Preferred Stock are computed on the basis of a 360-day year and the actual
number of days elapsed in the dividend period. If any date on which dividends
would otherwise be payable is not a business day, then the dividend payment
date will be the next succeeding business day unless such day falls in the
next calendar month, in which case the dividend payment date will be the
immediately preceding day that is a business day.

For any dividend period, LIBOR shall be determined by the calculation agent on
the second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
dividend period in the following manner:

LIBOR will be the offered rate per annum for three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such period, as that rate appears on
Moneyline Telerate Page 3750 as of 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second
London business day immediately preceding the first day of such dividend
period.  

If the rate described above does not appear on Moneyline Telerate page 3750,
LIBOR will be determined on the basis of the rates, at approximately 11:00
A.M., London time, on the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period, at which deposits of the following kind are
offered to prime banks in the London interbank market by four major banks in
that market selected by the calculation agent: three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a
Representative Amount. The calculation agent will request the principal London
office of each of these banks to provide a quotation of its rate. If at least
two quotations are provided, LIBOR for the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period will be the
arithmetic mean of the quotations.  

If fewer than two quotations are provided as described above, LIBOR for the
second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the rates for loans of the
following kind to leading European banks quoted, at approximately 11:00 A.M.
New York City time on the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period, by three major banks in New York City
selected by the calculation agent: three-month loans of U.S. dollars,
beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a Representative
Amount.  

If fewer than three banks selected by the calculation agent are quoting as
described above, LIBOR for the new dividend period will be LIBOR in effect for
the prior dividend period.  

The calculation agent's determination of any dividend rate, and its
calculation of the amount of dividends for any dividend period, will be on
file at the Company's principal offices, will be made available to any
stockholder upon request and will be final and binding in the absence of
manifest error.

This subsection uses several terms that have special meanings relevant to
calculating LIBOR. Those terms have the following meanings:

The term "Representative Amount" means an amount that, in the calculation
agent's judgment, is representative of a single transaction in the relevant
market at the relevant time.

The term "Moneyline Telerate Page" means the display on Moneyline Telerate,
Inc., or any successor service, on the page or pages specified herein or any
replacement page or pages on that service.

The term "business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday or Friday and is not a day on which banking institutions in New York
City generally are authorized or obligated by law or executive order to close.

The term "London business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is a day on which dealings in U.S. dollars
are transacted in the London interbank market.

Dividends on shares of Series C Preferred Stock are not cumulative.
Accordingly, if the board of directors of the Company, or a duly authorized
committee of the board, does not declare a dividend on the Series C Preferred
Stock payable in respect of any dividend period before the related dividend
payment date, such dividend will not accrue and the Company will have no
obligation to pay a dividend for that dividend period on the dividend payment
date or at any future time, whether or not dividends on the Series C Preferred
Stock are declared for any future dividend period.

So long as any share of Series C Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no
dividend shall be paid or declared on the Company's common stock or any other
shares of the Company's junior stock (as defined below) (other than a dividend
payable solely in junior stock), and no common stock or other junior stock
shall be purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for consideration by the
Company, directly or indirectly (other than as a result of a reclassification
of junior stock for or into other junior stock, or the exchange or conversion
of one share of junior stock for or into another share of junior stock and
other than through the use of the proceeds of a substantially contemporaneous
sale of junior stock), during a dividend period, unless the full dividends for
the latest completed dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series C
Preferred Stock have been declared and paid (or declared and a sum sufficient
for the payment thereof has been set aside). However, the foregoing provision
shall not restrict the ability of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or any of the
Company's other affiliates, to engage in any market-making transactions in the
Company's junior stock in the ordinary course of business.

As used in this description of the Series C Preferred Stock, "junior stock"
means any class or series of stock of the Company that ranks junior to the
Series C Preferred Stock either as to the payment of dividends or as to the
distribution of assets upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company. Junior stock includes the Company's common stock.

When dividends are not paid (or duly provided for) on any dividend payment
date (or, in the case of parity stock, as defined below, having dividend
payment dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the
Series C Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the
related dividend period for the Series C Preferred Stock) in full upon the
Series C Preferred Stock and any shares of parity stock, all dividends
declared upon the Series C Preferred Stock and all such equally ranking
securities payable on such dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity
stock having dividend payment dates different from the dividend payment dates
pertaining to the Series C Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling
within the related dividend period for the Series C Preferred Stock) shall be
declared pro rata so that the respective amounts of such dividends shall
bear the same ratio to each other as all accrued but unpaid dividends per
share on the Series C Preferred Stock and all parity stock payable on such
dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment
dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Series C
Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the related
dividend period for the Series C Preferred Stock) bear to each other.

As used in this description of the Series C Preferred Stock, "parity stock"
means any other class or series of stock of the Company that ranks equally
with the Series C Preferred Stock in the payment of dividends and in the
distribution of assets on any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company.

Subject to the foregoing, such dividends (payable in cash, stock or otherwise)
as may be determined by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) may be declared and paid on the Company's common stock
and any other stock ranking equally with or junior to the Series C Preferred
Stock from time to time out of any funds legally available for such payment,
and the shares of the Series C Preferred Stock shall not be entitled to
participate in any such dividend.

Liquidation Rights

Upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
the Company, holders of the Series C Preferred Stock are entitled to receive
out of assets of the Company available for distribution to stockholders, after
satisfaction of liabilities to creditors, if any, before any distribution of
assets is made to holders of common stock or of any of the Company's other
shares of stock ranking junior as to such a distribution to the shares of
Series C Preferred Stock, a liquidating distribution in the amount of $25,000
per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) plus declared and unpaid
dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. Holders of the
Series C Preferred Stock will not be entitled to any other amounts from the
Company after they have received their full liquidation preference.

In any such distribution, if the assets of the Company are not sufficient to
pay the liquidation preferences in full to all holders of the Series C
Preferred Stock and all holders of any other shares of the Company's stock
ranking equally as to such distribution with the Series C Preferred Stock, the
amounts paid to the holders of Series C Preferred Stock and to the holders of
all such other stock will be paid pro rata in accordance with the respective
aggregate liquidation

preferences of those holders. In any such distribution, the "liquidation
preference" of any holder of preferred stock means the amount payable to such
holder in such distribution, including any declared but unpaid dividends (and
any unpaid, accrued cumulative dividends in the case of any holder of stock on
which dividends accrue on a cumulative basis). If the liquidation preference
has been paid in full to all holders of the Company's Series C Preferred Stock
and any other shares of the Company's stock ranking equally as to the
liquidation distribution, the holders of the Company's other stock shall be
entitled to receive all remaining assets of the Company according to their
respective rights and preferences.

For purposes of this description of the Series C Preferred Stock, the merger
or consolidation of the Company with any other entity, including a merger or
consolidation in which the holders of Series C Preferred Stock receive cash,
securities or property for their shares, or the sale, lease or exchange of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company for cash, securities or
other property shall not constitute a liquidation, dissolution or winding up
of the Company.

Redemption

The Series C Preferred Stock is not subject to any mandatory redemption,
sinking fund or other similar provisions. The Series C Preferred Stock is
currently redeemable at the Company's option, in whole or in part, upon not
less than 30 nor more than 60 days' notice, at a redemption price equal to
$25,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share), plus any declared
and unpaid dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends.
Holders of Series C Preferred Stock have no right to require the redemption or
repurchase of the Series C Preferred Stock.

If shares of the Series C Preferred Stock are to be redeemed, the notice of
redemption shall be given by first class mail to the holders of record of the
Series C Preferred Stock to be redeemed, mailed not less than 30 days nor more
than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption thereof ( provided that,
if the depositary shares representing the Series C Preferred Stock are held in
book-entry form through The Depository Trust Company, or "DTC," the Company
may give such notice in any manner permitted by the DTC). Each notice of
redemption will include a statement setting forth: (i) the redemption date,
(ii) the number of shares of the Series C Preferred Stock to be redeemed and,
if less than all the shares held by such holder are to be redeemed, the number
of such shares to be redeemed from such holder, (iii) the redemption price and
(iv) the place or places where holders may surrender certificates evidencing
shares of Series C Preferred Stock for payment of the redemption price. If
notice of redemption of any shares of Series C Preferred Stock has been given
and if the funds necessary for such redemption have been set aside by the
Company for the benefit of the holders of any shares of Series C Preferred
Stock so called for redemption, then, from and after the redemption date,
dividends will cease to accrue on such shares of Series C Preferred Stock,
such shares of Series C Preferred Stock shall no longer be deemed outstanding
and all rights of the holders of such shares will terminate, except the right
to receive the redemption price.

In case of any redemption of only part of the shares of the Series C Preferred
Stock at the time outstanding, the shares to be redeemed shall be selected
either pro rata or in such other manner as the Company may determine to be
fair and equitable.

See "Description of Depositary Shares" below for information about redemption
of the depositary shares relating to the Company's Series C Preferred Stock.

Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy

The Company was previously regulated by the SEC as a consolidated supervised
entity ("CSE") pursuant to the SEC's rules at that time relating to CSEs
(referred to as the "CSE Rules"). The Company treated the Series C Preferred
Stock as allowable capital in accordance with the CSE Rules (such capital is
referred to below as "Allowable Capital").

If the regulatory capital requirements that apply to the Company change in the
future, the Series C Preferred Stock may be converted, at the Company's option
and without consent of the holders, into a new series of preferred stock,
subject to the limitations described below. The Company will be entitled to
exercise this conversion right as follows.

If both of the following occur:

the Company (by election or otherwise) becomes subject to any law, rule,
regulation or guidance (together, "regulations") relating to the Company's
capital adequacy, which regulation (i) modifies the existing requirements for
treatment as Allowable Capital, (ii) provides for a type or level of capital
characterized as "Tier 1" or its equivalent pursuant to regulations of any
governmental body having jurisdiction over the Company (or any of the
Company's subsidiaries or consolidated affiliates) and implementing capital
standards published by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the SEC,
the Federal Reserve Board or any other United States national governmental
body, or any other applicable regime based on capital standards published by
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision or its successor, or (iii) provides
for a type of capital that in the Company's judgment (after consultation with
counsel of recognized standing) is substantially equivalent to such "Tier 1"
capital (such capital described in either (ii) or (iii) is referred to below
as "Tier 1 Capital Equivalent"), and  

the Company affirmatively elects to qualify the Series C Preferred Stock for
such Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent treatment without any
sublimit or other quantitative restriction on the inclusion of the Series C
Preferred Stock in Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent (other than
any limitation the Company elects to accept and any limitation requiring that
common equity or a specified form of common equity constitute the dominant
form of Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent) under such
regulations,  

then, upon such affirmative election, the Series C Preferred Stock shall be
convertible at the Company's option into a new series of preferred stock
having terms and provisions substantially identical to those of the Series C
Preferred Stock, except that such new series may have such additional or
modified rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers, and such
limitations and restrictions thereof, as are necessary, in the Company's
judgment (after consultation with counsel of recognized standing), to comply
with the Required Unrestricted Capital Provisions (defined below), provided
that the Company will not cause any such conversion unless the Company
determines that the rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers of such
new series of preferred stock, taken as a whole, are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series C Preferred Stock, taken as a whole. For example,
the Company could agree to restrict its ability to pay dividends on or redeem
the new series of preferred stock for a specified period or indefinitely, to
the extent permitted by the terms and provisions of the new series of
preferred stock, since such a restriction would be permitted in the Company's
discretion under the terms and provisions of the Series C Preferred Stock.

The Company will provide notice to holders of the Series C Preferred Stock of
any election to qualify the Series C Preferred Stock for Allowable Capital or
Tier 1 Capital Equivalent treatment and of any determination to convert the
Series C Preferred Stock into a new series of preferred stock, promptly upon
the effectiveness of any such election or determination. A copy of any such
notice and of the relevant regulations will be on file at the Company's
principal offices and, upon request, will be made available to any
stockholder.

As used above, the term "Required Unrestricted Capital Provisions" means the
terms that are, in the Company's judgment (after consultation with counsel of
recognized standing), required for preferred stock to be treated as Allowable
Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent, as applicable, without any sublimit or
other quantitative restriction on the inclusion of such preferred stock in
Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent (other than any limitation the
Company elects to accept and any limitation requiring that common equity or a
specified form of common equity constitute the dominant form of Allowable
Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent) pursuant to applicable regulations.

Voting Rights

Except as provided below, the holders of the Series C Preferred Stock have no
voting rights.

Whenever dividends on any shares of the Series C Preferred Stock shall have
not been declared and paid for the equivalent of six or more dividend
payments, whether or not for consecutive dividend periods (as used in this
section, a "Nonpayment"), the holders of such shares, voting together as a
class with holders of any and all other series of voting preferred stock (as
defined below) then outstanding, will be entitled to vote for the election of
a total of two additional members of the Company's board of directors (as used
in this section, the "Preferred Stock Directors"), provided that the
election of any such directors shall not cause the Company to violate the
corporate governance requirement of the New York Stock Exchange (or any other
exchange on which the Company's securities may be listed) that listed
companies must have a majority of independent directors and provided further
that the Company's board of directors shall at no time include more than two
Preferred Stock Directors. In that event, the number of directors on the
Company's board of directors shall automatically increase by two, and the new
directors shall be elected at a special meeting called at the request of the
holders of record of at least 20% of the Series C Preferred Stock or of any
other series of voting preferred stock (unless such request is received less
than 90 days before the date fixed for the next annual or special meeting of
the stockholders, in which event such election shall be held at such next
annual or special meeting of stockholders), and at each subsequent annual
meeting. These voting rights will continue until dividends on the shares of
the Series C Preferred Stock and any such series of voting preferred stock for
at least four dividend periods, whether or not consecutive, following the
Nonpayment shall have been fully paid (or declared and a sum sufficient for
the payment of such dividends shall have been set aside for payment).

As used in this description of the Series C Preferred Stock, "voting preferred
stock" means any other class or series of preferred stock of the Company
ranking equally with the Series C Preferred Stock either as to dividends or
the distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up and
upon which like voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable. Whether
a plurality, majority or other portion of the shares of Series C Preferred
Stock and any other voting preferred stock have been voted in favor of any
matter shall be determined by reference to the liquidation amounts of the
shares voted.

If and when dividends for at least four dividend periods, whether or not
consecutive, following a Nonpayment have been paid in full (or declared and a
sum sufficient for such payment shall have been set aside), the holders of the
Series C Preferred Stock shall be divested of the foregoing voting rights
(subject to revesting in the event of each subsequent Nonpayment) and, if such
voting rights for all other holders of voting preferred stock have terminated,
the term of office of each Preferred Stock Director so elected shall terminate
and the number of directors on the board of directors shall automatically
decrease by two. In determining whether dividends have been paid for four
dividend periods following a Nonpayment, the Company may take account of any
dividend the Company elects to pay for such a dividend period after the
regular dividend date for that period has passed. Any Preferred Stock Director
may be removed at any time without cause by the holders of record of a
majority of the outstanding shares of the Series C Preferred Stock when they
have the voting rights described above (voting together as a class with all
series of voting preferred stock then outstanding). So long as a Nonpayment
shall continue, any vacancy in the office of a Preferred Stock Director (other
than prior to the initial election after a Nonpayment) may be filled by the
written consent of the Preferred Stock Director remaining in office, or if
none remains in office, by a vote of the holders of record of a majority of
the outstanding shares of Series C Preferred Stock and all voting preferred
stock when they have the voting rights described above (voting together as a
class). The Preferred Stock Directors shall each be entitled to one vote per
director on any matter.

So long as any shares of Series C Preferred Stock remain outstanding, the
Company will not, without the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at
least two-thirds of the outstanding shares of the Series C Preferred Stock and
all other series of voting preferred stock entitled to vote thereon, voting
together as a single class, given in person or by proxy, either in writing or
at a meeting:

amend or alter the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to authorize or create, or increase the authorized amount
of, any class or series of stock ranking senior to the Series C Preferred
Stock with respect to payment of dividends or the distribution of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;  

amend, alter or repeal the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect the special rights,
preferences, privileges and voting powers of the Series C Preferred Stock,
taken as a whole; or  

consummate a binding share exchange or reclassification involving the Series C
Preferred Stock or a merger or consolidation of the Company with another
entity, unless in each case (i) the shares of Series C Preferred Stock remain
outstanding or, in the case of any such merger or consolidation with respect
to which the Company is not the surviving or resulting entity, are converted
into or exchanged for preference securities of the surviving or resulting
entity or its ultimate parent, and (ii) such shares remaining outstanding or
such preference securities, as the case may be, have such rights, preferences,
privileges and voting powers, taken as a whole, as are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series C Preferred Stock, taken as a whole;  

provided, however , that any increase in the amount of the authorized or
issued Series C Preferred Stock or authorized preferred stock or the creation
and issuance, or an increase in the authorized or issued amount, of other
series of preferred stock ranking equally with and/or junior to the Series C
Preferred Stock with respect to the payment of dividends (whether such
dividends are cumulative or non-cumulative) and/or the distribution of assets
upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company will not be deemed
to adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting powers of
the Series C Preferred Stock. In addition, any conversion of the Series C
Preferred Stock upon the occurrence of certain regulatory events, as discussed
above under "- Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy," will not be
deemed to adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting
powers of the Series C Preferred Stock.

If an amendment, alteration, repeal, share exchange, reclassification, merger
or consolidation described above would adversely affect one or more but not
all series of voting preferred stock (including the Series C Preferred Stock
for this purpose), then only the series affected and entitled to vote shall
vote as a class in lieu of all such series of preferred stock.

Without the consent of the holders of the Series C Preferred Stock, so long as
such action does not adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series C Preferred Stock, the Company may amend, alter,
supplement or repeal any terms of the Series C Preferred Stock:

to cure any ambiguity, or to cure, correct or supplement any provision
contained in the certificate of designation for the Series C Preferred Stock
that may be defective or inconsistent; or  

to make any provision with respect to matters or questions arising with
respect to the Series C Preferred Stock that is not inconsistent with the
provisions of the certificate of designations.  

The foregoing voting provisions will not apply if, at or prior to the time
when the act with respect to which such vote would otherwise be required shall
be effected, all outstanding shares of Series C Preferred Stock shall have
been redeemed or called for redemption upon proper notice and sufficient funds
shall have been set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of the
Series C Preferred Stock to effect such redemption.

DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES

Please note that as used in this section, references to "holders" of
depositary shares mean those who own depositary shares registered in their own
names, on the books that the Company or the depositary maintain for this
purpose, and not indirect holders who own beneficial interests in depositary
shares registered in street name or issued in book-entry form through The
Depository Trust Company.

General

The Company has issued fractional interests in shares of preferred stock in
the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th ownership
interest in a share of Series C Preferred Stock and evidenced by a depositary
receipt. The shares of Series C Preferred Stock represented by depositary
shares are deposited under a deposit agreement among the Company, the
depositary and the holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
evidencing the depositary shares. Subject to the terms of the deposit
agreement, each holder of a depositary share is entitled, through the
depositary, in proportion to the applicable fraction of a share of Series C
Preferred Stock represented by such depositary share, to all the rights and
preferences of the Series C Preferred Stock represented thereby (including
dividend, voting, redemption and liquidation rights).

Dividends and Other Distributions

The depositary will distribute any cash dividends or other cash distributions
received in respect of the deposited Series C Preferred Stock to the record
holders of depositary shares relating to the underlying Series C Preferred
Stock in proportion to the number of depositary shares held by the holders.
The depositary will distribute any property received by it other than cash to
the record holders of depositary shares entitled to those distributions,
unless it determines that the distribution cannot be made proportionally among
those holders or that it is not feasible to make a distribution. In that
event, the depositary may, with the Company's approval, sell the property and
distribute the net proceeds from the sale to the holders of the depositary
shares in proportion to the number of depositary shares they hold.

Record dates for the payment of dividends and other matters relating to the
depositary shares will be the same as the corresponding record dates for the
Series C Preferred Stock.

The amounts distributed to holders of depositary shares will be reduced by any
amounts required to be withheld by the depositary or by the Company on account
of taxes or other governmental charges.

Redemption of Depositary Shares

If the Company redeems the Series C Preferred Stock represented by the
depositary shares, the depositary shares will be redeemed from the proceeds
received by the depositary resulting from the redemption of the Series C
Preferred Stock held by the depositary. The redemption price per depositary
share will be equal to 1/1,000th of the redemption price per share payable
with respect to the Series C Preferred Stock (or $25 per depositary share).
Whenever the Company redeems shares of Series C Preferred Stock held by the
depositary, the depositary will redeem, as of the same redemption date, the
number of depositary shares representing shares of Series C Preferred Stock so
redeemed.

In case of any redemption of less than all of the outstanding depositary
shares, the depositary shares to be redeemed will be selected by the
depositary pro rata or in such other manner determined by the depositary to
be equitable. In any such case, the Company will redeem depositary shares only
in increments of 1,000 shares and any multiple thereof.

Voting the Series C Preferred Stock

When the depositary receives notice of any meeting at which the holders of the
Series C Preferred Stock are entitled to vote, the depositary will mail the
information contained in the notice to the record holders of the depositary
shares relating to the Series C Preferred Stock. Each record holder of the
depositary shares on the record date, which will be the same date as the
record date for the Series C Preferred Stock, may instruct the depositary to
vote the amount of the Series C Preferred Stock represented by the holder's
depositary shares. To the extent possible, the depositary will vote the amount
of the Series C Preferred Stock represented by depositary shares in accordance
with the instructions it receives. The Company will agree to take all
reasonable actions that the depositary determines are necessary to enable the
depositary to vote as instructed. If the depositary does not receive specific
instructions from the holders of any depositary shares representing the Series
C Preferred Stock, it will vote all depositary shares of that series held by
it proportionately with instructions received.

Listing

The depositary shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the
ticker symbol "GS PrC."

Form of Preferred Stock and Depositary Shares

The depositary shares are issued in book-entry form through The Depository
Trust Company. The Series C Preferred Stock is issued in registered form to
the depositary.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DEPOSITARY SHARES, EACH REPRESENTING 1/1,000 TH INTEREST
IN A SHARE OF FLOATING RATE NON-CUMULATIVE PREFERRED STOCK, SERIES D 

DESCRIPTION OF SERIES D PREFERRED STOCK

The depositary is the sole holder of the Company's Floating Rate Non-
Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series D (the "Series D Preferred Stock"), and all
references herein to the holders of the Series D Preferred Stock shall mean
the depositary. However, the holders of depositary shares are entitled,
through the depositary, to exercise the rights and preferences of the holders
of the Series D Preferred Stock, as described below under "Description of
Depositary Shares." 

The following is a brief description of the material terms of the Series D
Preferred Stock. The following summary of the terms and provisions of the
Series D Preferred Stock does not purport to be complete and is qualified in
its entirety by reference to the pertinent sections of the Company's restated
certificate of incorporation, which is an exhibit to the Annual Report of
which this exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all
references to the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

General

The Company's authorized capital stock includes 150,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share. The Series D Preferred Stock is
part of a single series of authorized preferred stock. The Company may from
time to time, without notice to or the consent of holders of the Series D
Preferred Stock, issue additional shares of the Series D Preferred Stock, up
to the maximum number of authorized but unissued shares.

Shares of the Series D Preferred Stock rank senior to the Company's common
stock, equally with each other series of the Company's preferred stock
outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and at least equally with each other
series of preferred stock that the Company may issue (except for any senior
series that may be issued with the requisite consent of the holders of the
Series D Preferred Stock), with respect to the payment of dividends and
distributions of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up. In
addition, the Company will generally be able to pay dividends and
distributions upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up only out of lawfully
available funds for such payment ( i.e. , after taking account of all
indebtedness and other non-equity claims). The Series D Preferred Stock is
fully paid and nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their
purchase price in full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender
additional funds. Holders of Series D Preferred Stock do not have preemptive
or subscription rights to acquire more stock of the Company.

The Series D Preferred Stock is not convertible into, or exchangeable for,
shares of any other class or series of stock or other securities of the
Company, except under certain limited circumstances described below under "-
Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy." The Series D Preferred Stock
has no stated maturity and is not subject to any sinking fund or other
obligation of the Company to redeem or repurchase the Series D Preferred
Stock. The Series D Preferred Stock represents non-withdrawable capital, is
not a bank deposit and is not insured by the FDIC or any other governmental
agency, nor is it the obligation of, or guaranteed by, a bank.

Dividends

Dividends on shares of the Series D Preferred Stock are not mandatory. Holders
of Series D Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared
by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized committee of the
board), out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends under
Delaware law, non-cumulative cash dividends from the original issue date,
quarterly in arrears on the 10th day of February, May, August, and November of
each year (each, a "dividend payment date"). These dividends accrue, with
respect to each dividend period, on the liquidation preference amount of
$25,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) at a rate per annum
equal to the greater of (1) 0.67% above LIBOR (as described below) on the
related LIBOR determination date (as described below) or (2) 4.00%. In the
event that the Company issues additional shares of Series D Preferred Stock
after the original issue date, dividends on such shares may accrue from the
original issue date or any other date the Company specifies at the time such
additional shares are issued.

Dividends will be payable to holders of record of Series D Preferred Stock as
they appear on the Company's books on the applicable record date, which shall
be the 15th calendar day before that dividend payment date or such other
record date fixed by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) that is not more than 60 nor less than 10 days prior
to such dividend payment date (each, a "dividend record date"). These dividend
record dates will apply regardless of whether a particular dividend record
date is a business day. The corresponding record dates for the depositary
shares are the same as the record dates for the Series D Preferred Stock.

A dividend period is the period from and including a dividend payment date to
but excluding the next dividend payment date. Dividends payable on the Series
D Preferred Stock are computed on the basis of a 360-day year and the actual
number of days elapsed in the dividend period. If any date on which dividends
would otherwise be payable is not a business day, then the dividend payment
date will be the next succeeding business day unless such day falls in the
next calendar month, in which case the dividend payment date will be the
immediately preceding day that is a business day.

For any dividend period, LIBOR shall be determined by the calculation agent on
the second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
dividend period in the following manner:

LIBOR will be the offered rate per annum for three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such period, as that rate appears on
Moneyline Telerate Page 3750 (or any successor or replacement page) as of
11:00 A.M., London time, on the second London business day immediately
preceding the first day of such dividend period.  

If the rate described above does not appear on Moneyline Telerate page 3750
(or any successor or replacement page), LIBOR will be determined on the basis
of the rates, at approximately 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second London
business day immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period, at
which deposits of the following kind are offered to prime banks in the London
interbank market by four major banks in that market selected by the
calculation agent: three-month deposits in U.S. dollars, beginning on the
first day of such dividend period, and in a Representative Amount. The
calculation agent will request the principal London office of each of these
banks to provide a quotation of its rate. If at least two quotations are
provided, LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the
quotations.  

If fewer than two quotations are provided as described above, LIBOR for the
second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the rates for loans of the
following kind to leading European banks quoted, at approximately 11:00 A.M.
New York City time on the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period, by three major banks in New York City
selected by the calculation agent: three-month loans of U.S. dollars,
beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a Representative
Amount.  

If fewer than three banks selected by the calculation agent are quoting as
described above, LIBOR for the new dividend period will be LIBOR in effect for
the prior dividend period.  

The calculation agent's determination of any dividend rate, and its
calculation of the amount of dividends for any dividend period, will be on
file at the Company's principal offices, will be made available to any
stockholder upon request and will be final and binding in the absence of
manifest error.

This subscription uses several terms that have special meanings relevant to
calculating LIBOR. Those terms have the following meanings:

The term "Representative Amount" means an amount that, in the calculation
agent's judgment, is representative of a single transaction in the relevant
market at the relevant time.

The term "Moneyline Telerate Page" means the display on Moneyline Telerate,
Inc., or any successor service, on the page or pages specified herein or any
replacement page or pages on that service.

The term "business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday or Friday and is not a day on which banking institutions in New York
City generally are authorized or obligated by law or executive order to close.

The term "London business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is a day on which dealings in U.S. dollars
are transacted in the London interbank market.

Dividends on shares of Series D Preferred Stock are not cumulative.
Accordingly, if the board of directors of the Company (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) does not declare a dividend on the Series D Preferred
Stock payable in respect of any dividend period before the related dividend
payment date, such dividend will not accrue and the Company will have no
obligation to pay a dividend for that dividend period on the dividend payment
date or at any future time, whether or not dividends on the Series D Preferred
Stock are declared for any future dividend period.

So long as any share of Series D Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no
dividend shall be paid or declared on the Company's common stock or any other
shares of the Company's junior stock (as defined below) (other than a dividend
payable solely in junior stock), and no common stock or other junior stock
shall be purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for consideration by the
Company, directly or indirectly (other than as a result of a reclassification
of junior stock for or into other junior stock, or the exchange or conversion
of one share of junior stock for or into another share of junior stock and
other than through the use of the proceeds of a substantially contemporaneous
sale of junior stock), during a dividend period, unless the full dividends for
the latest completed dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series D
Preferred Stock have been declared and paid (or declared and a sum sufficient
for the payment thereof has been set aside). However, the foregoing provision
shall not restrict the ability of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or any of the
Company's other affiliates, to engage in any market-making transactions in the
Company's junior stock in the ordinary course of business.

As used in this description of the Series D Preferred Stock, "junior stock"
means any class or series of stock of the Company that ranks junior to the
Series D Preferred Stock either as to the payment of dividends or as to the
distribution of assets upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company. Junior stock includes the Company's common stock.

When dividends are not paid (or duly provided for) on any dividend payment
date (or, in the case of parity stock, as defined below, having dividend
payment dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the
Series D Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the
related dividend period for the Series D Preferred Stock) in full upon the
Series D Preferred Stock and any shares of parity stock, all dividends
declared upon the Series D Preferred Stock and all such equally ranking
securities payable on such dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity
stock having dividend payment dates different from the dividend payment dates
pertaining to the Series D Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling
within the related dividend period for the Series D Preferred Stock) shall be
declared pro rata so that the respective amounts of such dividends shall
bear the same ratio to each other as all accrued but unpaid dividends per
share on the Series D Preferred Stock and all parity stock payable on such
dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment
dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Series D
Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the related
dividend period for the Series D Preferred Stock) bear to each other.

As used in this description of the Series D Preferred Stock, "parity stock"
means any other class or series of stock of the Company that ranks equally
with the Series D Preferred Stock in the payment of dividends and in the
distribution of assets on any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company.

Subject to the foregoing, such dividends (payable in cash, stock or otherwise)
as may be determined by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) may be declared and paid on the Company's common stock
and any other stock ranking equally with or junior to the Series D Preferred
Stock from time to time out of any funds legally available for such payment,
and the shares of the Series D Preferred Stock shall not be entitled to
participate in any such dividend.

Liquidation Rights

Upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
the Company, holders of the Series D Preferred Stock are entitled to receive
out of assets of the Company available for distribution to stockholders, after
satisfaction of liabilities to creditors, if any, before any distribution of
assets is made to holders of common stock or of any of the Company's other
shares of stock ranking junior as to such a distribution to the shares of
Series D Preferred Stock, a liquidating distribution in the amount of $25,000
per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) plus declared and unpaid
dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. Holders of the
Series D Preferred Stock will not be entitled to any other amounts from the
Company after they have received their full liquidation preference.

In any such distribution, if the assets of the Company are not sufficient to
pay the liquidation preferences in full to all holders of the Series D
Preferred Stock and all holders of any other shares of the Company's stock
ranking equally as to such distribution with the Series D Preferred Stock, the
amounts paid to the holders of Series D Preferred Stock and to the holders of
all such other stock will be paid pro rata in accordance with the respective
aggregate liquidation

preferences of those holders. In any such distribution, the "liquidation
preference" of any holder of preferred stock means the amount payable to such
holder in such distribution, including any declared but unpaid dividends (and
any unpaid, accrued cumulative dividends in the case of any holder of stock on
which dividends accrue on a cumulative basis). If the liquidation preference
has been paid in full to all holders of the Company's Series D Preferred Stock
and any other shares of the Company's stock ranking equally as to the
liquidation distribution, the holders of the Company's other stock shall be
entitled to receive all remaining assets of the Company according to their
respective rights and preferences.

For purposes of this description of the Series D Preferred Stock, the merger
or consolidation of the Company with any other entity, including a merger or
consolidation in which the holders of Series D Preferred Stock receive cash,
securities or property for their shares, or the sale, lease or exchange of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company for cash, securities or
other property shall not constitute a liquidation, dissolution or winding up
of the Company.

Redemption

The Series D Preferred Stock is not subject to any mandatory redemption,
sinking fund or other similar provisions. The Series D Preferred Stock is
currently redeemable at the Company's option, in whole or in part, upon not
less than 30 nor more than 60 days' notice, at a redemption price equal to
$25,000 per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share), plus any declared
and unpaid dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends.
Holders of Series D Preferred Stock have no right to require the redemption or
repurchase of the Series D Preferred Stock.

If shares of the Series D Preferred Stock are to be redeemed, the notice of
redemption shall be given by first class mail to the holders of record of the
Series D Preferred Stock to be redeemed, mailed not less than 30 days nor more
than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption thereof ( provided that,
if the depositary shares representing the Series D Preferred Stock are held in
book-entry form through The Depository Trust Company, or "DTC," the Company
may give such notice in any manner permitted by the DTC). Each notice of
redemption will include a statement setting forth: (i) the redemption date,
(ii) the number of shares of the Series D Preferred Stock to be redeemed and,
if less than all the shares held by such holder are to be redeemed, the number
of such shares to be redeemed from such holder, (iii) the redemption price and
(iv) the place or places where holders may surrender certificates evidencing
shares of Series D Preferred Stock for payment of the redemption price. If
notice of redemption of any shares of Series D Preferred Stock has been given
and if the funds necessary for such redemption have been set aside by the
Company for the benefit of the holders of any shares of Series D Preferred
Stock so called for redemption, then, from and after the redemption date,
dividends will cease to accrue on such shares of Series D Preferred Stock,
such shares of Series D Preferred Stock shall no longer be deemed outstanding
and all rights of the holders of such shares will terminate, except the right
to receive the redemption price.

In case of any redemption of only part of the shares of the Series D Preferred
Stock at the time outstanding, the shares to be redeemed shall be selected
either pro rata or in such other manner as the Company may determine to be
fair and equitable.

See "Description of Depositary Shares" below for information about redemption
of the depositary shares relating to the Company's Series D Preferred Stock.

Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy

The Company was previously regulated by the SEC as a consolidated supervised
entity ("CSE") pursuant to the SEC's rules relating to CSEs (referred to as
the "CSE Rules"). The Company treated the Series D Preferred Stock as
allowable capital in accordance with the CSE Rules (such capital is referred
to below as "Allowable Capital").

If the regulatory capital requirements that apply to the Company change in the
future, the Series D Preferred Stock may be converted, at the Company's option
and without consent of the holders, into a new series of preferred stock,
subject to the limitations described below. The Company will be entitled to
exercise this conversion right as follows.

If both of the following occur:

the Company (by election or otherwise) becomes subject to any law, rule,
regulation or guidance (together, "regulations") relating to the Company's
capital adequacy, which regulation (i) modifies the existing requirements for
treatment as Allowable Capital, (ii) provides for a type or level of capital
characterized as "Tier 1" or its equivalent pursuant to regulations of any
governmental body  

having jurisdiction over the Company (or any of the Company's subsidiaries or
consolidated affiliates) and implementing capital standards published by the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the SEC, the Federal Reserve Board or
any other United States national governmental body, or any other applicable
regime based on capital standards published by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision or its successor, or (iii) provides for a type of capital that in
the Company's judgment (after consultation with counsel of recognized
standing) is substantially equivalent to such "Tier 1" capital (such capital
described in either (ii) or (iii) is referred to below as "Tier 1 Capital
Equivalent"), and  

the Company affirmatively elects to qualify the Series D Preferred Stock for
such Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent treatment without any
sublimit or other quantitative restriction on the inclusion of the Series D
Preferred Stock in Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent (other than
any limitation the Company elects to accept and any limitation requiring that
common equity or a specified form of common equity constitute the dominant
form of Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent) under such
regulations,  

then, upon such affirmative election, the Series D Preferred Stock shall be
convertible at the Company's option into a new series of preferred stock
having terms and provisions substantially identical to those of the Series D
Preferred Stock, except that such new series may have such additional or
modified rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers, and such
limitations and restrictions thereof, as are necessary, in the Company's
judgment (after consultation with counsel of recognized standing), to comply
with the Required Unrestricted Capital Provisions (defined below), provided
that the Company will not cause any such conversion unless the Company
determines that the rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers of such
new series of preferred stock, taken as a whole, are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series D Preferred Stock, taken as a whole. For example,
the Company could agree to restrict its ability to pay dividends on or redeem
the new series of preferred stock for a specified period or indefinitely, to
the extent permitted by the terms and provisions of the new series of
preferred stock, since such a restriction would be permitted in the Company's
discretion under the terms and provisions of the Series D Preferred Stock.

The Company will provide notice to holders of the Series D Preferred Stock of
any election to qualify the Series D Preferred Stock for Allowable Capital or
Tier 1 Capital Equivalent treatment and of any determination to convert the
Series D Preferred Stock into a new series of preferred stock, promptly upon
the effectiveness of any such election or determination. A copy of any such
notice and of the relevant regulations will be on file at the Company's
principal offices and, upon request, will be made available to any
stockholder.

As used above, the term "Required Unrestricted Capital Provisions" means the
terms that are, in the Company's judgment (after consultation with counsel of
recognized standing), required for preferred stock to be treated as Allowable
Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent, as applicable, without any sublimit or
other quantitative restriction on the inclusion of such preferred stock in
Allowable Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent (other than any limitation the
Company elects to accept and any limitation requiring that common equity or a
specified form of common equity constitute the dominant form of Allowable
Capital or Tier 1 Capital Equivalent) pursuant to applicable regulations.

Voting Rights

Except as provided below, the holders of the Series D Preferred Stock have no
voting rights.

Whenever dividends on any shares of the Series D Preferred Stock shall have
not been declared and paid for the equivalent of six or more dividend
payments, whether or not for consecutive dividend periods (as used in this
section, a "Nonpayment"), the holders of such shares, voting together as a
class with holders of any and all other series of voting preferred stock (as
defined below) then outstanding, will be entitled to vote for the election of
a total of two additional members of the Company's board of directors (as used
in this section, the "Preferred Stock Directors"), provided that the
election of any such directors shall not cause the Company to violate the
corporate governance requirement of the New York Stock Exchange (or any other
exchange on which the Company's securities may be listed) that listed
companies must have a majority of independent directors and provided further
that the Company's board of directors shall at no time include more than two
Preferred Stock Directors. In that event, the number of directors on the
Company's board of directors shall automatically increase by two, and the new
directors shall be elected at a special meeting called at the request of the
holders of record of at least 20% of the Series D Preferred Stock or of any
other series of voting preferred stock (unless such request is received less
than 90 days before the date fixed for the next annual or special meeting of
the stockholders, in which event such election shall be held at such next
annual or special meeting of stockholders), and at each subsequent annual
meeting. These voting rights will continue until dividends on the shares of
the Series D Preferred Stock and any such series of voting preferred stock for
at least four dividend periods, whether or not consecutive, following the
Nonpayment shall have been fully paid (or declared and a sum sufficient for
the payment of such dividends shall have been set aside for payment).

As used in this description of the Series D Preferred Stock, "voting preferred
stock" means any other class or series of preferred stock of the Company
ranking equally with the Series D Preferred Stock either as to dividends or
the distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up and
upon which like voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable. Whether
a plurality, majority or other portion of the shares of Series D Preferred
Stock and any other voting preferred stock have been voted in favor of any
matter shall be determined by reference to the liquidation amounts of the
shares voted.

If and when dividends for at least four dividend periods, whether or not
consecutive, following a Nonpayment have been paid in full (or declared and a
sum sufficient for such payment shall have been set aside), the holders of the
Series D Preferred Stock shall be divested of the foregoing voting rights
(subject to revesting in the event of each subsequent Nonpayment) and, if such
voting rights for all other holders of voting preferred stock have terminated,
the term of office of each Preferred Stock Director so elected shall terminate
and the number of directors on the board of directors shall automatically
decrease by two. In determining whether dividends have been paid for four
dividend periods following a Nonpayment, the Company may take account of any
dividend the Company elects to pay for such a dividend period after the
regular dividend date for that period has passed. Any Preferred Stock Director
may be removed at any time without cause by the holders of record of a
majority of the outstanding shares of the Series D Preferred Stock when they
have the voting rights described above (voting together as a class with all
series of voting preferred stock then outstanding). So long as a Nonpayment
shall continue, any vacancy in the office of a Preferred Stock Director (other
than prior to the initial election after a Nonpayment) may be filled by the
written consent of the Preferred Stock Director remaining in office, or if
none remains in office, by a vote of the holders of record of a majority of
the outstanding shares of Series D Preferred Stock and all voting preferred
stock when they have the voting rights described above (voting together as a
class). The Preferred Stock Directors shall each be entitled to one vote per
director on any matter.

So long as any shares of Series D Preferred Stock remain outstanding, the
Company will not, without the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at
least two-thirds of the outstanding shares of the Series D Preferred Stock and
all other series of voting preferred stock entitled to vote thereon, voting
together as a single class, given in person or by proxy, either in writing or
at a meeting:

amend or alter the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to authorize or create, or increase the authorized amount
of, any class or series of stock ranking senior to the Series D Preferred
Stock with respect to payment of dividends or the distribution of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;  

amend, alter or repeal the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect the special rights,
preferences, privileges and voting powers of the Series D Preferred Stock,
taken as a whole; or  

consummate a binding share exchange or reclassification involving the Series D
Preferred Stock or a merger or consolidation of the Company with another
entity, unless in each case (i) the shares of Series D Preferred Stock remain
outstanding or, in the case of any such merger or consolidation with respect
to which the Company is not the surviving or resulting entity, are converted
into or exchanged for preference securities of the surviving or resulting
entity or its ultimate parent, and (ii) such shares remaining outstanding or
such preference securities, as the case may be, have such rights, preferences,
privileges and voting powers, taken as a whole, as are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series D Preferred Stock, taken as a whole;  

provided, however , that any increase in the amount of the authorized or
issued Series D Preferred Stock or authorized preferred stock or the creation
and issuance, or an increase in the authorized or issued amount, of other
series of preferred stock ranking equally with and/or junior to the Series D
Preferred Stock with respect to the payment of dividends (whether such
dividends are cumulative or non-cumulative) and/or the distribution of assets
upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company will not be deemed
to adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting powers of
the Series D Preferred Stock. In addition, any conversion of the Series D
Preferred Stock upon the occurrence of certain regulatory events, as discussed
above under "- Regulatory Changes Relating to Capital Adequacy," will not be
deemed to adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting
powers of the Series D Preferred Stock.

If an amendment, alteration, repeal, share exchange, reclassification, merger
or consolidation described above would adversely affect one or more but not
all series of voting preferred stock (including the Series D Preferred Stock
for this purpose), then only the series affected and entitled to vote shall
vote as a class in lieu of all such series of preferred stock.

Without the consent of the holders of the Series D Preferred Stock, so long as
such action does not adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series D Preferred Stock, the Company may amend, alter,
supplement or repeal any terms of the Series D Preferred Stock:

to cure any ambiguity, or to cure, correct or supplement any provision
contained in the certificate of designation for the Series D Preferred Stock
that may be defective or inconsistent; or  

to make any provision with respect to matters or questions arising with
respect to the Series D Preferred Stock that is not inconsistent with the
provisions of the certificate of designations.  

The foregoing voting provisions will not apply if, at or prior to the time
when the act with respect to which such vote would otherwise be required shall
be effected, all outstanding shares of Series D Preferred Stock shall have
been redeemed or called for redemption upon proper notice and sufficient funds
shall have been set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of the
Series D Preferred Stock to effect such redemption.

DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES

Please note that as used in this section, references to "holders" of
depositary shares mean those who own depositary shares registered in their own
names, on the books that the Company or the depositary maintain for this
purpose, and not indirect holders who own beneficial interests in depositary
shares registered in street name or issued in book-entry form through The
Depository Trust Company.

General

The Company has issued fractional interests in shares of preferred stock in
the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th ownership
interest in a share of Series D Preferred Stock and evidenced by a depositary
receipt. The shares of Series D Preferred Stock represented by depositary
shares are deposited under a deposit agreement among the Company, the
depositary and the holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
evidencing the depositary shares. Subject to the terms of the deposit
agreement, each holder of a depositary share is entitled, through the
depositary, in proportion to the applicable fraction of a share of Series D
Preferred Stock represented by such depositary share, to all the rights and
preferences of the Series D Preferred Stock represented thereby (including
dividend, voting, redemption and liquidation rights).

Dividends and Other Distributions

The depositary will distribute any cash dividends or other cash distributions
received in respect of the deposited Series D Preferred Stock to the record
holders of depositary shares relating to the underlying Series D Preferred
Stock in proportion to the number of depositary shares held by the holders.
The depositary will distribute any property received by it other than cash to
the record holders of depositary shares entitled to those distributions,
unless it determines that the distribution cannot be made proportionally among
those holders or that it is not feasible to make a distribution. In that
event, the depositary may, with the Company's approval, sell the property and
distribute the net proceeds from the sale to the holders of the depositary
shares in proportion to the number of depositary shares they hold.

Record dates for the payment of dividends and other matters relating to the
depositary shares will be the same as the corresponding record dates for the
Series D Preferred Stock.

The amounts distributed to holders of depositary shares will be reduced by any
amounts required to be withheld by the depositary or by the Company on account
of taxes or other governmental charges.

Redemption of Depositary Shares

If the Company redeems the Series D Preferred Stock represented by the
depositary shares, the depositary shares will be redeemed from the proceeds
received by the depositary resulting from the redemption of the Series D
Preferred Stock held by the depositary. The redemption price per depositary
share will be equal to 1/1,000th of the redemption price per share payable
with respect to the Series D Preferred Stock (or $25 per depositary share).
Whenever the Company redeems shares of Series D Preferred Stock held by the
depositary, the depositary will redeem, as of the same redemption date, the
number of depositary shares representing shares of Series D Preferred Stock so
redeemed.

In case of any redemption of less than all of the outstanding depositary
shares, the depositary shares to be redeemed will be selected by the
depositary pro rata or in such other manner determined by the depositary to
be equitable. In any such case, the Company will redeem depositary shares only
in increments of 1,000 shares and any multiple thereof.

Voting the Series D Preferred Stock

When the depositary receives notice of any meeting at which the holders of the
Series D Preferred Stock are entitled to vote, the depositary will mail the
information contained in the notice to the record holders of the depositary
shares relating to the Series D Preferred Stock. Each record holder of the
depositary shares on the record date, which will be the same date as the
record date for the Series D Preferred Stock, may instruct the depositary to
vote the amount of the Series D Preferred Stock represented by the holder's
depositary shares. To the extent possible, the depositary will vote the amount
of the Series D Preferred Stock represented by depositary shares in accordance
with the instructions it receives. The Company will agree to take all
reasonable actions that the depositary determines are necessary to enable the
depositary to vote as instructed. If the depositary does not receive specific
instructions from the holders of any depositary shares representing the Series
D Preferred Stock, it will vote all depositary shares of that series held by
it proportionately with instructions received.

Listing

The depositary shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the
ticker symbol "GS PrD."

Form of Preferred Stock and Depositary Shares

The depositary shares are issued in book-entry form through The Depository
Trust Company. The Series D Preferred Stock is issued in registered form to
the depositary.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DEPOSITARY SHARES, EACH REPRESENTING 1/1,000 TH INTEREST
IN A SHARE OF 

5.50% FIXED-TO-FLOATING RATE NON-CUMULATIVE PREFERRED STOCK, SERIES J 

DESCRIPTION OF SERIES J PREFERRED STOCK

The depositary is the sole holder of the Company's 5.50% Fixed-To-Floating
Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series J (the "Series J Preferred
Stock"), and all references herein to the holders of the Series J Preferred
Stock shall mean the depositary. However, the holders of depositary shares are
entitled, through the depositary, to exercise the rights and preferences of
the holders of the Series J Preferred Stock, as described below under
"Description of Depositary Shares." 

The following is a brief description of the material terms of the Series C
Preferred Stock. The following summary of the terms and provisions of the
Series J Preferred Stock does not purport to be complete and is qualified in
its entirety by reference to the pertinent sections of the Company's restated
certificate of incorporation, which is an exhibit to the Annual Report of
which this exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all
references to the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

General

The Company's authorized capital stock includes 150,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share. The Series J Preferred Stock is
part of a single series of the Company's authorized preferred stock. The
Company may from time to time, without notice to or the consent of holders of
the Series J Preferred Stock, issue additional shares of the Series J
Preferred Stock, up to the maximum number of authorized but unissued shares.

Shares of the Series J Preferred Stock rank senior to the Company's common
stock, equally with each other series of the Company's preferred stock
outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and at least equally with each other
series of preferred stock that the Company may issue (except for any senior
series that may be issued with the requisite consent of the holders of Series
J Preferred Stock), with respect to the payment of dividends and distributions
of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up. In addition, the
Company will generally be able to pay dividends and distributions upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up only out of lawfully available funds
for such payment ( i.e. , after taking account of all indebtedness and other
non-equity claims). The Series J Preferred Stock is fully paid and
nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their purchase price in
full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender additional funds.
Holders of Series J Preferred Stock do not have preemptive or subscription
rights to acquire more stock of the Company.

The Series J Preferred Stock is not convertible into, or exchangeable for,
shares of any other class or series of stock or other securities of the
Company. The Series J Preferred Stock has no stated maturity and is not
subject to any sinking fund or other obligation of the Company to redeem or
repurchase the Series J Preferred Stock. The Series J Preferred Stock
represents non-withdrawable capital, is not a bank deposit and is not insured
by the FDIC or any other governmental agency, nor is it the obligation of, or
guaranteed by, a bank.

Dividends

Dividends on shares of the Series J Preferred Stock are not mandatory. Holders
of Series J Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared
by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized committee of the
board), out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends, non-
cumulative cash dividends from the original issue date, quarterly in arrears
on the 10th day of February, May, August and November of each year (each, a
"dividend payment date"). These dividends accrue, with respect to each
dividend period, on the liquidation preference amount of $25,000 per share
(equivalent to $25 per depositary share) at a rate per annum equal to 5.50%
from the original issue date to, but excluding, May 10, 2023, and, thereafter
at a floating rate per annum equal to LIBOR plus 3.64% on the related LIBOR
determination date. In the event that the Company issues additional shares of
Series J Preferred Stock after the original issue date, dividends on such
shares may accrue from the original issue date or any other date the Company
specifies at the time such additional shares are issued.

Dividends will be payable to holders of record of Series J Preferred Stock as
they appear on the Company's books on the applicable record date, which shall
be the 15th calendar day before that dividend payment date or such other
record date fixed by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) that is not more than 60 nor less than 10 days prior
to such dividend payment date (each, a "dividend record date"). These dividend
record dates will apply regardless of whether a particular dividend record
date is a business day. The corresponding record dates for the depositary
shares are the same as the record dates for the Series J Preferred Stock.

A dividend period is the period from and including a dividend payment date to
but excluding the next dividend payment date. Dividends payable on the Series
J Preferred Stock for any period beginning prior to May 10, 2023 are
calculated on the basis of a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months,
and dividends for periods beginning on or after such date will be calculated
on the basis of a 360-day year and the actual number of days elapsed in the
dividend period. If any date on which dividends would otherwise be payable is
not a business day, then the dividend payment date will be the next succeeding
business day unless, after May 10, 2023, such day falls in the next calendar
month, in which case the dividend payment date will be the immediately
preceding day that is a business day. "Business day" means a day that is a
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is not a day on which
banking institutions in New York City generally are authorized or obligated by
law or executive order to close.

For any dividend period commencing on or after May 10, 2023, LIBOR will be
determined by the calculation agent on the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period in the following
manner:

LIBOR will be the offered rate per annum for three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such period, as that rate appears on
Reuters screen LIBOR01 (or any successor or replacement page) as of
approximately 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period.  

If the rate described above does not so appear on the Reuters screen LIBOR01
(or any successor or replacement page), then LIBOR will be determined on the
basis of the rates, at approximately 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second
London business day immediately preceding the first day of such dividend
period, at which deposits of the following kind are offered to prime banks in
the London interbank market by four major banks in that market selected by the
calculation agent: three-month deposits in U.S. dollars, beginning on the
first day of such dividend period, and in a Representative Amount. The
calculation agent will request the principal London office of each of these
banks to provide a quotation of its rate. If at least two quotations are
provided, LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the
quotations.  

If fewer than two of the requested quotations described above are provided,
LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the first day
of such dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the rates for loans of
the following kind to leading European banks quoted, at approximately 11:00
A.M., New York City time, on the second London business day immediately
preceding the first day of such dividend period, by three major banks in New
York City selected by the calculation agent: three-month loans of U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a
Representative Amount.  

If no quotation is provided as described above, then the calculation agent,
after consulting such sources as it deems comparable to any of the foregoing
quotations or display page, or any such source as it deems reasonable from
which to estimate LIBOR or any of the foregoing lending rates, shall determine
LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the first day
of such dividend period in its sole discretion.  

The calculation agent's determination of any dividend rate, and its
calculation of the amount of dividends for any dividend period, will be on
file at the Company's principal offices, will be made available to any
stockholder upon request and will be final and binding in the absence of
manifest error.

This subsection uses several terms that have special meanings relevant to
calculating LIBOR. Those terms have the following meanings:

The term "Representative Amount" means an amount that, in the calculation
agent's judgment, is representative of a single transaction in the relevant
market at the relevant time.

The term "London business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is a day on which dealings in U.S. dollars
are transacted in the London interbank market.

The term "Reuters screen" means the display on the Reuters 3000 Xtra service,
or any successor or replacement service.

Dividends on shares of Series J Preferred Stock are not cumulative.
Accordingly, if the board of directors of the Company (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) does not declare a dividend on the Series J Preferred
Stock payable in respect of any dividend period before the related dividend
payment date, such dividend will not accrue and the Company will have no
obligation to pay a dividend for that dividend period on the dividend payment
date or at any future time, whether or not dividends on the Series J Preferred
Stock are declared for any future dividend period.

So long as any share of Series J Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no
dividend shall be paid or declared on the Company's common stock or any other
shares of the Company's junior stock (as defined below) (other than a dividend
payable solely in junior stock), and no common stock or other junior stock
shall be purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for consideration by the
Company, directly or indirectly (other than as a result of a reclassification
of junior stock for or into other junior stock, or the exchange or conversion
of one share of junior stock for or into another share of junior stock and
other than through the use of the proceeds of a substantially contemporaneous
sale of junior stock), during a dividend period, unless the full dividends for
the latest completed dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series J
Preferred Stock have been declared and paid (or declared and a sum sufficient
for the payment thereof has been set aside). However, the foregoing provision
shall not restrict the ability of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or any of the
Company's other affiliates, to engage in any market-making transactions in the
Company's junior stock in the ordinary course of business.

As used in this description of the Series J Preferred Stock, "junior stock"
means any class or series of stock of the Company that ranks junior to the
Series J Preferred Stock either as to the payment of dividends or as to the
distribution of assets upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company's junior stock includes the Company's common stock.

When dividends are not paid (or duly provided for) on any dividend payment
date (or, in the case of parity stock, as defined below, having dividend
payment dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the
Series J Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the
related dividend period for the Series J Preferred Stock) in full on the
Series J Preferred Stock and any shares of parity stock, all dividends
declared on the Series J Preferred Stock and all such equally ranking
securities payable on such dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity
stock having dividend payment dates different from the dividend payment dates
pertaining to the Series J Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling
within the related dividend period for the Series J Preferred Stock) shall be
declared pro rata so that the respective amounts of such dividends shall
bear the same ratio to each other as all accrued but unpaid dividends per
share on the Series J Preferred Stock and all parity stock payable on such
dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment
dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Series J
Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the related
dividend period for the Series J Preferred Stock) bear to each other.

As used in this description of the Series J Preferred Stock, "parity stock"
means any other class or series of stock of the Company that ranks equally
with the Series J Preferred Stock in the payment of dividends and in the
distribution of assets on any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company.

Subject to the foregoing, such dividends (payable in cash, stock or otherwise)
as may be determined by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) may be declared and paid on the Company's common stock
and any other stock ranking equally with or junior to the Series J Preferred
Stock from time to time out of any funds legally available for such payment,
and the shares of the Series J Preferred Stock shall not be entitled to
participate in any such dividend.

Dividends on the Series J Preferred Stock will not be declared, paid or set
aside for payment if the Company fails to comply, or if and to the extent such
act would cause the Company to fail to comply, with applicable laws and
regulations. The restated certificate of incorporation provides that dividends
on the Series J Preferred Stock may not be declared or set aside for payment
if and to the extent such dividends would cause the Company to fail to comply
with applicable capital adequacy standards.

Liquidation Rights

Upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
the Company, holders of Series J Preferred Stock are entitled to receive out
of assets of the Company available for distribution to stockholders, after
satisfaction of liabilities to creditors, if any, before any distribution of
assets is made to holders of common stock or of any of the Company's other
shares of stock ranking junior as to such a distribution to the shares of
Series J Preferred Stock, a liquidating distribution in the amount of $25,000
per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) plus declared and unpaid
dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. Holders of Series
J Preferred Stock will not be entitled to any other amounts from the Company
after they have received their full liquidation preference.

The Series J Preferred Stock may be fully subordinate to interests held by the
U.S. government in the event of a receivership, insolvency, liquidation, or
similar proceeding, including a proceeding under the "orderly liquidation
authority" provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act.

In any such distribution, if the assets of the Company are not sufficient to
pay the liquidation preferences in full to all holders of Series J Preferred
Stock and all holders of any other shares of the Company's stock ranking
equally as to such distribution with the Series J Preferred Stock, the amounts
paid to the holders of Series J Preferred Stock and to the holders of all such
other stock will be paid pro rata in accordance with the respective
aggregate liquidation preferences of those holders. In any such distribution,
the "liquidation preference" of any holder of preferred stock means the amount
payable to such holder in such distribution, including any declared but unpaid
dividends (and any unpaid, accrued cumulative dividends in the case of any
holder of stock on which dividends accrue on a cumulative basis). If the
liquidation preference has been paid in full to all holders of the Company's
Series J Preferred Stock and any other shares of the Company's stock ranking
equally as to the liquidation distribution, the holders of the Company's other
stock shall be entitled to receive all remaining assets of the Company
according to their respective rights and preferences.

For purposes of this description of the Series J Preferred Stock, the merger
or consolidation of the Company with any other entity, including a merger or
consolidation in which the holders of Series J Preferred Stock receive cash,
securities or property for their shares, or the sale, lease or exchange of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company for cash, securities or
other property shall not constitute a liquidation, dissolution or winding up
of the Company.

Redemption

The Series J Preferred Stock is perpetual and has no maturity date, and is not
subject to any mandatory redemption, sinking fund or other similar provisions.
The Company may, at its option, redeem the Series J Preferred Stock (i) in
whole or in part, from time to time, on any date on or after May 10, 2023, or
(ii) in whole but not in part at any time within 90 days following a
Regulatory Capital Treatment Event, in each case, upon not less than 30 nor
more than 60 days' notice, at a redemption price equal to $25,000 per share
(equivalent to $25 per depositary share), plus accrued and unpaid dividends
for the then-current dividend period to but excluding the redemption date,
whether or not declared. Holders of Series J Preferred Stock have no right to
require the redemption or repurchase of the Series J Preferred Stock.

The Company is a bank holding company and a financial holding company
regulated by the Federal Reserve Board. The Company treats the Series J
Preferred Stock as "tier 1 capital" (or its equivalent) for purposes of the
capital adequacy guidelines of the Federal Reserve Board (or, as and if
applicable, the capital adequacy guidelines or regulations of any successor
appropriate federal banking agency).

A "Regulatory Capital Treatment Event" means the good faith determination by
the Company that, as a result of (i) any amendment to, or change in, the laws
or regulations of the United States or any political subdivision of or in the
United States that is enacted or becomes effective after the initial issuance
of any share of the Series J Preferred Stock, (ii) any proposed change in
those laws or regulations that is announced or becomes effective after the
initial issuance of any share of the Series J Preferred Stock, or (iii) any
official administrative decision or judicial decision or administrative action
or other official pronouncement interpreting or applying those laws or
regulations that is announced after the initial issuance of any share of the
Series J Preferred Stock, there is more than an insubstantial risk that the
Company will not be entitled to treat the full liquidation preference amount
of $25,000 per share of Series J Preferred Stock then outstanding as "tier 1
capital" (or its equivalent) for purposes of the capital adequacy guidelines
of the Federal Reserve Board (or, as and if applicable, the capital adequacy
guidelines or regulations of any successor appropriate federal banking agency)
as then in effect and applicable, for so long as any share of Series J
Preferred Stock is outstanding. "Appropriate federal banking agency" means the
"appropriate federal banking agency" with respect to the Company as that term
is defined in Section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act or any
successor provision.

The Company will not exercise its option to redeem any shares of preferred
stock without obtaining the approval of the Federal Reserve Board (or any
successor appropriate federal banking agency) if then required by applicable
law. Unless the Federal Reserve Board (or any successor appropriate federal
banking agency) authorizes the Company to do otherwise in writing, the Company
will redeem the Series J Preferred Stock only if it is replaced with other
tier 1 capital that is not a restricted core capital element ( e.g. , common
stock or another series of noncumulative perpetual preferred stock).

If shares of Series J Preferred Stock are to be redeemed, the notice of
redemption shall be given by first class mail to the holders of record of
Series J Preferred Stock to be redeemed, mailed not less than 30 days nor more
than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption thereof ( provided that,
if the depositary shares representing the Series J Preferred Stock are held in
book-entry form through The Depository Trust Company, or "DTC," the Company
may give such notice in any manner permitted by the DTC). Each notice of
redemption will include a statement setting forth: (i) the redemption date,
(ii) the number of shares of Series J Preferred Stock to be redeemed and, if
less than all the shares held by such holder are to be redeemed, the number of
such shares to be redeemed from such holder, (iii) the redemption price and
(iv) the place or places where holders may surrender certificates evidencing
shares of Series J Preferred Stock for payment of the redemption price. If
notice of redemption of any shares of Series J Preferred Stock has been given
and if the funds necessary for such redemption have been set aside by the
Company for the benefit of the holders of any shares of Series J Preferred
Stock so called for redemption, then, from and after the redemption date,
dividends will cease to accrue on such shares of Series J Preferred Stock,
such shares of Series J Preferred Stock shall no longer be deemed outstanding
and all rights of the holders of such shares will terminate, except the right
to receive the redemption price.

In case of any redemption of only part of the shares of the Series J Preferred
Stock at the time outstanding, the shares to be redeemed shall be selected
either pro rata or in such other manner as the Company may determine to be
fair and equitable.

See "Description of Depositary Shares" below for information about redemption
of the depositary shares relating to the Company's Series J Preferred Stock.

Voting Rights

Except as provided below, the holders of Series J Preferred Stock have no
voting rights.

Whenever dividends on any shares of Series J Preferred Stock shall have not
been declared and paid for the equivalent of six or more dividend payments,
whether or not for consecutive dividend periods (as used in this section, a
"Nonpayment"), the holders of such shares, voting together as a class with
holders of any and all other series of voting preferred stock (as defined
below) then outstanding, will be entitled to vote for the election of a total
of two additional members of the Company's board of directors (as used in this
section, the "Preferred Stock Directors"), provided that the Company's board
of directors shall at no time include more than two Preferred Stock Directors.
In that event, the number of directors on the Company's board of directors
shall automatically increase by two, and the new directors shall be elected at
a special meeting called at the request of the holders of record of at least
20% of the Series J Preferred Stock or of any other series of voting preferred
stock (unless such request is received less than 90 days before the date fixed
for the next annual or special meeting of the stockholders, in which event
such election shall be held at such next annual or special meeting of
stockholders), and at each subsequent annual meeting.

These voting rights will continue until dividends on the shares of Series J
Preferred Stock and any such series of voting preferred stock for four
consecutive dividend periods following the Nonpayment shall have been fully
paid (or declared and a sum sufficient for the payment of such dividends shall
have been set aside for payment).

As used in this description of the Series J Preferred Stock, "voting preferred
stock" means any other class or series of preferred stock of the Company
ranking equally with the Series J Preferred Stock either as to dividends or
the distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up and
upon which like voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable. Whether
a plurality, majority or other portion of the shares of Series J Preferred
Stock and any other voting preferred stock have been voted in favor of any
matter shall be determined by reference to the liquidation amounts of the
shares voted.

If and when dividends for four consecutive dividend periods following a
Nonpayment have been paid in full (or declared and a sum sufficient for such
payment shall have been set aside), the holders of Series J Preferred Stock
shall be divested of the foregoing voting rights (subject to revesting in the
event of each subsequent Nonpayment) and, if such voting rights for all other
holders of voting preferred stock have terminated, the term of office of each
Preferred Stock Director so elected shall terminate and the number of
directors on the board of directors shall automatically decrease by two. Any
Preferred Stock Director may be removed at any time without cause by the
holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of Series J
Preferred Stock when they have the voting rights described above (voting
together as a class with all series of voting preferred stock then
outstanding). So long as a Nonpayment shall continue, any vacancy in the
office of a Preferred Stock Director (other than prior to the initial election
after a Nonpayment) may be filled by the written consent of the Preferred
Stock Director remaining in office, or if none remains in office, by a vote of
the holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of Series J
Preferred Stock and all voting preferred stock when they have the voting
rights described above (voting together as a class). The Preferred Stock
Directors shall each be entitled to one vote per director on any matter.

So long as any shares of Series J Preferred Stock remain outstanding, the
Company will not, without the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at
least two-thirds of the outstanding shares of the Series J Preferred Stock and
all other series of voting preferred stock entitled to vote thereon, voting
together as a single class, given in person or by proxy, either in writing or
at a meeting:

amend or alter the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to authorize or create, or increase the authorized amount
of, any class or series of stock ranking senior to the Series J Preferred
Stock with respect to payment of dividends or the distribution of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;  

amend, alter or repeal the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect the special rights,
preferences, privileges and voting powers of the Series J Preferred Stock,
taken as a whole; or  

consummate a binding share exchange or reclassification involving the Series J
Preferred Stock or a merger or consolidation of the Company with another
entity, unless in each case (i) the shares of Series J Preferred Stock remain
outstanding or, in the case of any such merger or consolidation with respect
to which the Company is not the surviving or resulting entity, are converted
into or exchanged for preference securities of the surviving or resulting
entity or its ultimate parent, and (ii) such shares remaining outstanding or
such preference securities, as the case may be, have such rights, preferences,
privileges and voting powers, taken as a whole, as are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series J Preferred Stock, taken as a whole;  

provided, however , that any increase in the amount of the authorized or
issued Series J Preferred Stock or authorized preferred stock or the creation
and issuance, or an increase in the authorized or issued amount, of other
series of preferred stock ranking equally with and/or junior to the Series J
Preferred Stock with respect to the payment of dividends (whether such
dividends are cumulative or non-cumulative) and/or the distribution of assets
upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company will not be deemed
to adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting powers of
the Series J Preferred Stock.

If an amendment, alteration, repeal, share exchange, reclassification, merger
or consolidation described above would adversely affect one or more but not
all series of voting preferred stock (including the Series J Preferred Stock
for this purpose), then only the series affected and entitled to vote shall
vote as a class in lieu of all such series of preferred stock.

Without the consent of the holders of Series J Preferred Stock, so long as
such action does not adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series J Preferred Stock, the Company may amend, alter,
supplement or repeal any terms of the Series J Preferred Stock:

to cure any ambiguity, or to cure, correct or supplement any provision
contained in the certificate of designation for the Series J Preferred Stock
that may be defective or inconsistent; or  

to make any provision with respect to matters or questions arising with
respect to the Series J Preferred Stock that is not inconsistent with the
provisions of the certificate of designations.  

The foregoing voting provisions will not apply if, at or prior to the time
when the act with respect to which such vote would otherwise be required shall
be effected, all outstanding shares of Series J Preferred Stock shall have
been redeemed or called for redemption upon proper notice and sufficient funds
shall have been set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of
Series J Preferred Stock to effect such redemption.

DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES

Please note that as used in this section, references to "holders" of
depositary shares mean those who own depositary shares registered in their own
names, on the books that the Company or the depositary maintain for this
purpose, and not indirect holders who own beneficial interests in depositary
shares registered in street name or issued in book-entry form through The
Depository Trust Company.

General

The Company has issued fractional interests in shares of preferred stock in
the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th ownership
interest in a share of Series J Preferred Stock and evidenced by a depositary
receipt. The shares of Series J Preferred Stock represented by depositary
shares are deposited under a deposit agreement among the Company, the
depositary and the holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
evidencing the depositary shares. Subject to the terms of the deposit
agreement, each holder of a depositary share is entitled, through the
depositary, in proportion to the applicable fraction of a share of Series J
Preferred Stock represented by such depositary share, to all the rights and
preferences of the Series J Preferred Stock represented thereby (including
dividend, voting, redemption and liquidation rights).

Dividends and Other Distributions

The depositary will distribute any cash dividends or other cash distributions
received in respect of the deposited Series J Preferred Stock to the record
holders of depositary shares relating to the underlying Series J Preferred
Stock in proportion to the number of depositary shares held by the holders.
The depositary will distribute any property received by it other than cash to
the record holders of depositary shares entitled to those distributions,
unless it determines that the distribution cannot be made proportionally among
those holders or that it is not feasible to make a distribution. In that
event, the depositary may, with the Company's approval, sell the property and
distribute the net proceeds from the sale to the holders of the depositary
shares in proportion to the number of depositary shares they hold.

Record dates for the payment of dividends and other matters relating to the
depositary shares will be the same as the corresponding record dates for the
Series J Preferred Stock.

The amounts distributed to holders of depositary shares will be reduced by any
amounts required to be withheld by the depositary or by the Company on account
of taxes or other governmental charges.

Redemption of Depositary Shares

If the Company redeems the Series J Preferred Stock represented by the
depositary shares, the depositary shares will be redeemed from the proceeds
received by the depositary resulting from the redemption of the Series J
Preferred Stock held by the depositary. The redemption price per depositary
share will be equal to 1/1,000th of the redemption price per share payable
with respect to the Series J Preferred Stock (or $25 per depositary share).
Whenever the Company redeems shares of Series J Preferred Stock held by the
depositary, the depositary will redeem, as of the same redemption date, the
number of depositary shares representing shares of Series J Preferred Stock so
redeemed.

In case of any redemption of less than all of the outstanding depositary
shares, the depositary shares to be redeemed will be selected by the
depositary pro rata or in such other manner determined by the depositary to
be equitable. In any such case, the Company will redeem depositary shares only
in increments of 1,000 shares and any multiple thereof.

Voting the Series J Preferred Stock

When the depositary receives notice of any meeting at which the holders of
Series J Preferred Stock are entitled to vote, the depositary will mail the
information contained in the notice to the record holders of the depositary
shares relating to the Series J Preferred Stock. Each record holder of the
depositary shares on the record date, which will be the same date as the
record date for the Series J Preferred Stock, may instruct the depositary to
vote the amount of Series J Preferred Stock represented by the holder's
depositary shares. To the extent possible, the depositary will vote the amount
of Series J Preferred Stock represented by depositary shares in accordance
with the instructions it receives. The Company will agree to take all
reasonable actions that the depositary determines are necessary to enable the
depositary to vote as instructed. If the depositary does not receive specific
instructions from the holders of any depositary shares representing the Series
J Preferred Stock, it will vote all depositary shares of that series held by
it proportionately with instructions received.

Listing

The depositary shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the
ticker symbol "GS PrJ."

Form of Preferred Stock and Depositary Shares

The depositary shares are issued in book-entry form through The Depository
Trust Company. The Series J Preferred Stock is issued in registered form to
the depositary.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DEPOSITARY SHARES, EACH REPRESENTING 1/1,000 TH INTEREST
IN A SHARE OF 6.375% FIXED-TO-FLOATING RATE NON-CUMULATIVE PREFERRED STOCK,
SERIES K 

DESCRIPTION OF SERIES K PREFERRED STOCK

The depositary is the sole holder of the Company's 6.375% Fixed-to-Floating
Rate Non-Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series K (the "Series K Preferred
Stock"), and all references herein to the holders of the Series K Preferred
Stock shall mean the depositary. However, the holders of depositary shares are
entitled, through the depositary, to exercise the rights and preferences of
the holders of Series K Preferred Stock, as described below under "Description
of Depositary Shares." 

The following is a brief description of the material terms of the Series K
Preferred Stock. The following summary of the terms and provisions of the
Series K Preferred Stock does not purport to be complete and is qualified in
its entirety by reference to the pertinent sections of the Company's restated
certificate of incorporation, which is an exhibit to the Annual Report of
which this exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all
references to the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

General

The Company's authorized capital stock includes 150,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share. The Series K Preferred Stock is
part of a single series of the Company's authorized preferred stock. The
Company may from time to time, without notice to or the consent of holders of
the Series K Preferred Stock, issue additional shares of the Series K
Preferred Stock, up to the maximum number of authorized but unissued shares.

Shares of the Series K Preferred Stock rank senior to the Company's common
stock, equally with each other series of the Company's preferred stock
outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and at least equally with each other
series of preferred stock that the Company may issue (except for any senior
series that may be issued with the requisite consent of the holders of Series
K Preferred Stock), with respect to the payment of dividends and distributions
of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up. In addition, the
Company will generally be able to pay dividends and distributions upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up only out of lawfully available funds
for such payment ( i.e. , after taking account of all indebtedness and other
non-equity claims). The Series K Preferred Stock is fully paid and
nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their purchase price in
full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender additional funds.
Holders of Series K Preferred Stock do not have preemptive or subscription
rights to acquire more stock of the Company.

The Series K Preferred Stock is not convertible into, or exchangeable for,
shares of any other class or series of stock or other securities of the
Company. The Series K Preferred Stock has no stated maturity and is not
subject to any sinking fund or other obligation of the Company to redeem or
repurchase the Series K Preferred Stock. The Series K Preferred Stock
represents non-withdrawable capital, is not a bank deposit and is not insured
by the FDIC or any other governmental agency, nor is it the obligation of, or
guaranteed by, a bank.

Dividends

Dividends on shares of the Series K Preferred Stock are not mandatory. Holders
of Series K Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared
by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized committee of the
board), out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends, non-
cumulative cash dividends from the original issue date, quarterly in arrears
on the 10th day of February, May, August and November of each year (each, a
"dividend payment date"). These dividends accrue, with respect to each
dividend period, on the liquidation preference amount of $25,000 per share
(equivalent to $25 per depositary share) at a rate per annum equal to 6.375%
from the original issue date to, but excluding, May 10, 2024 (or, if not a
business day, the next succeeding business day), and, thereafter at a floating
rate per annum equal to LIBOR plus 3.55% on the related LIBOR determination
date. In the event that the Company issues additional shares of Series K
Preferred Stock after the original issue date, dividends on such shares may
accrue from the original issue date or any other date the Company specifies at
the time such additional shares are issued.

Dividends will be payable to holders of record of Series K Preferred Stock as
they appear on the Company's books on the applicable record date, which shall
be the 15th calendar day before that dividend payment date or such other
record date fixed by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) that is not more than 60 nor less than 10 days prior
to such dividend payment date (each, a "dividend record date"). These dividend
record dates will apply regardless of whether a particular dividend record
date is a business day. The corresponding record dates for the depositary
shares are the same as the record dates for the Series K Preferred Stock.

A dividend period is the period from and including a dividend payment date to
but excluding the next dividend payment date. Dividends payable on the Series
K Preferred Stock for any period beginning prior to May 10, 2024 will be
calculated on the basis of a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months,
and dividends for periods beginning on or after such date will be calculated
on the basis of a 360-day year and the actual number of days elapsed in the
dividend period. If any date on which dividends would otherwise be payable is
not a business day, then the dividend payment date will be the next succeeding
business day unless, after May 10, 2024, such day falls in the next calendar
month, in which case the dividend payment date will be the immediately
preceding day that is a business day. "Business day" means a day that is a
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is not a day on which
banking institutions in New York City generally are authorized or obligated by
law or executive order to close.

For any dividend period commencing on or after May 10, 2024, LIBOR will be
determined by the calculation agent on the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period in the following
manner:

LIBOR will be the offered rate per annum for three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such period, as that rate appears on
Reuters screen LIBOR01 (or any successor or replacement page) as of
approximately 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such dividend period.  

If the rate described above does not so appear on the Reuters screen LIBOR01
(or any successor or replacement page), then LIBOR will be determined on the
basis of the rates, at approximately 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second
London business day immediately preceding the first day of such dividend
period, at which deposits of the following kind are offered to prime banks in
the London interbank market by four major banks in that market selected by the
calculation agent: three-month deposits in U.S. dollars, beginning on the
first day of such dividend period, and in a Representative Amount. The
calculation agent will request the principal London office of each of these
banks to provide a quotation of its rate. If at least two quotations are
provided, LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the
quotations.  

If fewer than two of the requested quotations described above are provided,
LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the first day
of such dividend period will be the arithmetic mean of the rates for loans of
the following kind to leading European banks quoted, at approximately 11:00
A.M., New York City time, on the second London business day immediately
preceding the first day of such dividend period, by three major banks in New
York City selected by the calculation agent: three-month loans of U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such dividend period, and in a
Representative Amount.  

If no quotation is provided as described above, then the calculation agent,
after consulting such sources as it deems comparable to any of the foregoing
quotations or display page, or any such source as it deems reasonable from
which to estimate LIBOR or any of the foregoing lending rates, shall determine
LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the first day
of such dividend period in its sole discretion.  

The calculation agent's determination of any dividend rate, and its
calculation of the amount of dividends for any dividend period, will be on
file at the Company's principal offices, will be made available to any
stockholder upon request and will be final and binding in the absence of
manifest error.

This subsection uses several terms that have special meanings relevant to
calculating LIBOR. Those terms have the following meanings:

The term "Representative Amount" means an amount that, in the calculation
agent's judgment, is representative of a single transaction in the relevant
market at the relevant time.

The term "London business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is a day on which dealings in U.S. dollars
are transacted in the London interbank market.

The term "Reuters screen" means the display on the Reuters 3000 Xtra service,
or any successor or replacement service.

Dividends on shares of Series K Preferred Stock are not cumulative.
Accordingly, if the board of directors of the Company (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) does not declare a dividend on the Series K Preferred
Stock payable in respect of any dividend period before the related dividend
payment date, such dividend will not accrue and the Company will have no
obligation to pay a dividend for that dividend period on the dividend payment
date or at any future time, whether or not dividends on the Series K Preferred
Stock are declared for any future dividend period.

So long as any share of Series K Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no
dividend shall be paid or declared on the Company's common stock or any other
shares of the Company's junior stock (as defined below) (other than a dividend
payable solely in junior stock), and no common stock or other junior stock
shall be purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for consideration by the
Company, directly or indirectly (other than as a result of a reclassification
of junior stock for or into other junior stock, or the exchange or conversion
of one share of junior stock for or into another share of junior stock and
other than through the use of the proceeds of a substantially contemporaneous
sale of junior stock), during a dividend period, unless the full dividends for
the latest completed dividend period on all outstanding shares of Series K
Preferred Stock have been declared and paid (or declared and a sum sufficient
for the payment thereof has been set aside). However, the foregoing provision
shall not restrict the ability of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or any of the
Company's other affiliates, to engage in any market-making transactions in the
Company's junior stock in the ordinary course of business.

As used in this description of the Series K Preferred Stock, "junior stock"
means any class or series of stock of the Company that ranks junior to the
Series K Preferred Stock either as to the payment of dividends or as to the
distribution of assets upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company. Junior stock includes the Company's common stock.

When dividends are not paid (or duly provided for) on any dividend payment
date (or, in the case of parity stock, as defined below, having dividend
payment dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the
Series K Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the
related dividend period for the Series K Preferred Stock) in full on the
Series K Preferred Stock and any shares of parity stock, all dividends
declared on the Series K Preferred Stock and all such equally ranking
securities payable on such dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity
stock having dividend payment dates different from the dividend payment dates
pertaining to the Series K Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling
within the related dividend period for the Series K Preferred Stock) shall be
declared pro rata so that the respective amounts of such dividends shall
bear the same ratio to each other as all accrued but unpaid dividends per
share on the Series K Preferred Stock and all parity stock payable on such
dividend payment date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment
dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Series K
Preferred Stock, on a dividend payment date falling within the related
dividend period for the Series K Preferred Stock) bear to each other.

As used in this description of the Series K Preferred Stock, "parity stock"
means any other class or series of stock of the Company that ranks equally
with the Series K Preferred Stock in the payment of dividends and in the
distribution of assets on any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the
Company.

Subject to the foregoing, such dividends (payable in cash, stock or otherwise)
as may be determined by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) may be declared and paid on the Company's common stock
and any other stock ranking equally with or junior to the Series K Preferred
Stock from time to time out of any funds legally available for such payment,
and the shares of the Series K Preferred Stock shall not be entitled to
participate in any such dividend.

Dividends on the Series K Preferred Stock will not be declared, paid or set
aside for payment if the Company fails to comply, or if and to the extent such
act would cause the Company to fail to comply, with applicable laws, rules and
regulations. The restated certificate of incorporation provides that dividends
on the Series K Preferred Stock may not be declared or set aside for payment
if and to the extent such dividends would cause the Company to fail to comply
with applicable capital adequacy standards.

Liquidation Rights

Upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
the Company, holders of Series K Preferred Stock are entitled to receive out
of assets of the Company available for distribution to stockholders, after
satisfaction of liabilities to creditors, if any, before any distribution of
assets is made to holders of common stock or of any of the Company's other
shares of stock ranking junior as to such a distribution to the shares of
Series K Preferred Stock, a liquidating distribution in the amount of $25,000
per share (equivalent to $25 per depositary share) plus declared and unpaid
dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends. Holders of Series
K Preferred Stock will not be entitled to any other amounts from the Company
after they have received their full liquidation preference.

The Series K Preferred Stock, like the Company's other series of preferred
stock, may be fully subordinate to any interests held by the U.S. government
in the event of a receivership, insolvency, liquidation, or similar
proceeding, including a proceeding under the "orderly liquidation authority"
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.

In any such distribution, if the assets of the Company are not sufficient to
pay the liquidation preferences in full to all holders of Series K Preferred
Stock and all holders of any other shares of the Company's stock ranking
equally as to such distribution with the Series K Preferred Stock, the amounts
paid to the holders of Series K Preferred Stock and to the holders of all such
other stock will be paid pro rata in accordance with the respective
aggregate liquidation preferences of those holders. In any such distribution,
the " liquidation preference" of any holder of preferred stock means the
amount payable to such holder in such distribution, including any declared but
unpaid dividends (and any unpaid, accrued cumulative dividends in the case of
any holder of stock on which dividends accrue on a cumulative basis). If the
liquidation preference has been paid in full to all holders of the Company's
Series K Preferred Stock and any other shares of the Company's stock ranking
equally as to the liquidation distribution, the holders of the Company's other
stock shall be entitled to receive all remaining assets of the Company
according to their respective rights and preferences.

For purposes of this description of the Series K Preferred Stock, the merger
or consolidation of the Company with any other entity, including a merger or
consolidation in which the holders of Series K Preferred Stock receive cash,
securities or property for their shares, or the sale, lease or exchange of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company for cash, securities or
other property shall not constitute a liquidation, dissolution or winding up
of the Company.

Redemption

The Series K Preferred Stock is perpetual and has no maturity date, and is not
subject to any mandatory redemption, sinking fund or other similar provisions.
The Company may, at the Company's option, redeem the Series K Preferred Stock
(i) in whole or in part, from time to time, on any date on or after May 10,
2024 (or, if not a business day, the next succeeding business day), or (ii) in
whole but not in part at any time within 90 days following a Regulatory
Capital Treatment Event, in each case, upon not less than 30 nor more than 60
days' notice, at a redemption price equal to $25,000 per share (equivalent to
$25 per depositary share), plus accrued and unpaid dividends for the then-
current dividend period to but excluding the redemption date, whether or not
declared. Holders of Series K Preferred Stock have no right to require the
redemption or repurchase of the Series K Preferred Stock.

The Company is a bank holding company and a financial holding company
regulated by the Federal Reserve Board. The Company treats the Series K
Preferred Stock as "tier 1 capital" (or its equivalent) for purposes of the
capital adequacy guidelines of the Federal Reserve Board (or, as and if
applicable, the capital adequacy guidelines or regulations of any successor
appropriate federal banking agency).

A "Regulatory Capital Treatment Event" means the good faith determination by
the Company that, as a result of (i) any amendment to, or change in, the laws,
rules or regulations of the United States or any political subdivision of or
in the United States that is enacted or becomes effective after the initial
issuance of any share of the Series K Preferred Stock, (ii) any proposed
change in those laws, rules or regulations that is announced or becomes
effective after the initial issuance of any share of the Series K Preferred
Stock, or (iii) any official administrative decision or judicial decision or
administrative action or other official pronouncement interpreting or applying
those laws, rules or regulations or policies with respect thereto that is
announced after the initial issuance of any share of the Series K Preferred
Stock, there is more than an insubstantial risk that the Company will not be
entitled to treat the full liquidation preference amount of $25,000 per share
of Series K Preferred Stock then outstanding as "tier 1 capital" (or its
equivalent) for purposes of the capital adequacy guidelines of the Federal
Reserve Board (or, as and if applicable, the capital adequacy guidelines or
regulations of any successor appropriate federal banking agency) as then in
effect and applicable, for so long as any share of Series K Preferred Stock is
outstanding. "Appropriate federal banking agency" means the "appropriate
federal banking agency" with respect to the Company as that term is defined in
Section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act or any successor provision.

The Company will not exercise its option to redeem any shares of preferred
stock without obtaining the approval of the Federal Reserve Board (or any
successor appropriate federal banking agency) as required by applicable law.
Unless the Federal Reserve Board (or any successor appropriate federal banking
agency) authorizes the Company to do otherwise in writing, the Company will
redeem the Series K Preferred Stock only if it is replaced with other tier 1
capital that is not a restricted core capital element ( e.g. , common stock
or another series of noncumulative perpetual preferred stock).

If shares of Series K Preferred Stock are to be redeemed, the notice of
redemption shall be given by first class mail to the holders of record of
Series K Preferred Stock to be redeemed, mailed not less than 30 days nor more
than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption thereof ( provided that,
if the depositary shares representing the Series K Preferred Stock are held in
book-entry form through The Depository Trust Company, or "DTC," the Company
may give such notice in any manner permitted by the DTC). Each notice of
redemption will include a statement setting forth: (i) the redemption date,
(ii) the number of shares of Series K Preferred Stock to be redeemed and, if
less than all the shares held by such holder are to be redeemed, the number of
such shares to be redeemed from such holder, (iii) the redemption price and
(iv) the place or places where holders may surrender certificates evidencing
shares of Series K Preferred Stock for payment of the redemption price. If
notice of redemption of any shares of Series K Preferred Stock has been given
and if the funds necessary for such redemption have been set aside by the
Company for the benefit of the holders of any shares of Series K Preferred
Stock so called for redemption, then, from and after the redemption date,
dividends will cease to accrue on such shares of Series K Preferred Stock,
such shares of Series K Preferred Stock shall no longer be deemed outstanding
and all rights of the holders of such shares will terminate, except the right
to receive the redemption price.

In case of any redemption of only part of the shares of the Series K Preferred
Stock at the time outstanding, the shares to be redeemed shall be selected
either pro rata or by lot.

See "Description of Depositary Shares" below for information about redemption
of the depositary shares relating to the Company's Series K Preferred Stock.

Voting Rights

Except as provided below, the holders of Series K Preferred Stock have no
voting rights.

Whenever dividends on any shares of Series K Preferred Stock shall have not
been declared and paid for the equivalent of six or more dividend payments,
whether or not for consecutive dividend periods (as used in this section, a
"Nonpayment"), the holders of such shares, voting together as a class with
holders of any and all other series of voting preferred stock (as defined
below) then outstanding, will be entitled to vote for the election of a total
of two additional members of the Company's board of directors (as used in this
section, the "Preferred Stock Directors"), provided that the Company's board
of directors shall at no time include more than two Preferred Stock Directors.
In that event, the number of directors on the Company's board of directors
shall automatically increase by two, and the new directors shall be elected at
a special meeting called at the request of the holders of record of at least
20% of the Series K Preferred Stock or of any other series of voting preferred
stock (unless such request is received less than 90 days before the date fixed
for the next annual or special meeting of the stockholders, in which event
such election shall be held at such next annual or special meeting of
stockholders), and at each subsequent annual meeting. These voting rights will
continue until dividends on the shares of Series K Preferred Stock and any
such series of voting preferred stock for four consecutive dividend periods
following the Nonpayment shall have been fully paid (or declared and a sum
sufficient for the payment of such dividends shall have been set aside for
payment).

As used in this description of the Series K Preferred Stock, "voting preferred
stock" means any other class or series of preferred stock of the Company
ranking equally with the Series K Preferred Stock either as to dividends or
the distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up and
upon which like voting rights have been conferred and are exercisable. Whether
a plurality, majority or other portion of the shares of Series K Preferred
Stock and any other voting preferred stock have been voted in favor of any
matter shall be determined by reference to the liquidation amounts of the
shares voted.

If and when dividends for four consecutive dividend periods following a
Nonpayment have been paid in full (or declared and a sum sufficient for such
payment shall have been set aside), the holders of Series K Preferred Stock
shall be divested of the foregoing voting rights (subject to revesting in the
event of each subsequent Nonpayment) and, if such voting rights for all other
holders of voting preferred stock have terminated, the term of office of each
Preferred Stock Director so elected shall terminate and the number of
directors on the board of directors shall automatically decrease by two. Any
Preferred Stock Director may be removed at any time without cause by the
holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of Series K
Preferred Stock when they have the voting rights described above (voting
together as a class with all series of voting preferred stock then
outstanding). So long as a Nonpayment shall continue, any vacancy in the
office of a Preferred Stock Director (other than prior to the initial election
after a Nonpayment) may be filled by the written consent of the Preferred
Stock Director remaining in office, or if none remains in office, by a vote of
the holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of Series K
Preferred Stock and all voting preferred stock when they have the voting
rights described above (voting together as a class). The Preferred Stock
Directors shall each be entitled to one vote per director on any matter.

So long as any shares of Series K Preferred Stock remain outstanding, the
Company will not, without the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at
least two-thirds of the outstanding shares of the Series K Preferred Stock and
all other series of voting preferred stock entitled to vote thereon, voting
together as a single class, given in person or by proxy, either in writing or
at a meeting:

amend or alter the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to authorize or create, or increase the authorized amount
of, any class or series of stock ranking senior to the Series K Preferred
Stock with respect to payment of dividends or the distribution of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;  

amend, alter or repeal the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect the special rights,
preferences, privileges and voting powers of the Series K Preferred Stock,
taken as a whole; or  

consummate a binding share exchange or reclassification involving the Series K
Preferred Stock or a merger or consolidation of the Company with another
entity, unless in each case (i) the shares of Series K Preferred Stock remain
outstanding or, in the case of any such merger or consolidation with respect
to which the Company is not the surviving or resulting entity, are converted
into or exchanged for preference securities of the surviving or resulting
entity or its ultimate parent, and (ii) such shares remaining outstanding or
such preference securities, as the case may be, have such rights, preferences,
privileges and voting powers, taken as a whole, as are not materially less
favorable to the holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series K Preferred Stock, taken as a whole;  

provided, however , that any increase in the amount of the authorized or
issued Series K Preferred Stock or authorized preferred stock or the creation
and issuance, or an increase in the authorized or issued amount, of other
series of preferred stock ranking equally with and/or junior to the Series K
Preferred Stock with respect to the payment of dividends (whether such
dividends are cumulative or non-cumulative) and/or the distribution of assets
upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company will not be deemed
to adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting powers of
the Series K Preferred Stock.

If an amendment, alteration, repeal, share exchange, reclassification, merger
or consolidation described above would adversely affect one or more but not
all series of voting preferred stock (including the Series K Preferred Stock
for this purpose), then only the series affected and entitled to vote shall
vote as a class in lieu of all such series of preferred stock.

Without the consent of the holders of Series K Preferred Stock, so long as
such action does not adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers of the Series K Preferred Stock, the Company may amend, alter,
supplement or repeal any terms of the Series K Preferred Stock:

to cure any ambiguity, or to cure, correct or supplement any provision
contained in the certificate of designation for the Series K Preferred Stock
that may be defective or inconsistent; or  

to make any provision with respect to matters or questions arising with
respect to the Series K Preferred Stock that is not inconsistent with the
provisions of the certificate of designations.  

The foregoing voting provisions will not apply if, at or prior to the time
when the act with respect to which such vote would otherwise be required shall
be effected, all outstanding shares of Series K Preferred Stock shall have
been redeemed or called for redemption upon proper notice and sufficient funds
shall have been set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of
Series K Preferred Stock to effect such redemption.

DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES

Please note that as used in this section, references to "holders" of
depositary shares mean those who own depositary shares registered in their own
names, on the books that the Company or the depositary maintain for this
purpose, and not indirect holders who own beneficial interests in depositary
shares registered in street name or issued in book-entry form through The
Depository Trust Company.

General

The Company has issued fractional interests in shares of preferred stock in
the form of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th ownership
interest in a share of Series K Preferred Stock and evidenced by a depositary
receipt. The shares of Series K Preferred Stock represented by depositary
shares are deposited under a deposit agreement among the Company, the
depositary and the holders from time to time of the depositary receipts
evidencing the depositary shares. Subject to the terms of the deposit
agreement, each holder of a depositary share is entitled, through the
depositary, in proportion to the applicable fraction of a share of Series K
Preferred Stock represented by such depositary share, to all the rights and
preferences of the Series K Preferred Stock represented thereby (including
dividend, voting, redemption and liquidation rights).

Dividends and Other Distributions

The depositary will distribute any cash dividends or other cash distributions
received in respect of the deposited Series K Preferred Stock to the record
holders of depositary shares relating to the underlying Series K Preferred
Stock in proportion to the number of depositary shares held by the holders.
The depositary will distribute any property received by it other than cash to
the record holders of depositary shares entitled to those distributions,
unless it determines that the distribution cannot be made proportionally among
those holders or that it is not feasible to make a distribution. In that
event, the depositary may, with the Company's approval, sell the property and
distribute the net proceeds from the sale to the holders of the depositary
shares in proportion to the number of depositary shares they hold.

Record dates for the payment of dividends and other matters relating to the
depositary shares will be the same as the corresponding record dates for the
Series K Preferred Stock.

The amounts distributed to holders of depositary shares will be reduced by any
amounts required to be withheld by the depositary or by the Company on account
of taxes or other governmental charges.

Redemption of Depositary Shares

If the Company redeems the Series K Preferred Stock represented by the
depositary shares, the depositary shares will be redeemed from the proceeds
received by the depositary resulting from the redemption of the Series K
Preferred Stock held by the depositary. The redemption price per depositary
share will be equal to 1/1,000th of the redemption price per share payable
with respect to the Series K Preferred Stock (or $25 per depositary share).
Whenever the Company redeems shares of Series K Preferred Stock held by the
depositary, the depositary will redeem, as of the same redemption date, the
number of depositary shares representing shares of Series K Preferred Stock so
redeemed.

In case of any redemption of less than all of the outstanding depositary
shares, the depositary shares to be redeemed will be selected by the
depositary pro rata or by lot. In any such case, the Company will redeem
depositary shares only in increments of 1,000 shares and any multiple thereof.

Voting the Series K Preferred Stock

When the depositary receives notice of any meeting at which the holders of
Series K Preferred Stock are entitled to vote, the depositary will mail the
information contained in the notice to the record holders of the depositary
shares relating to the Series K Preferred Stock. Each record holder of the
depositary shares on the record date, which will be the same date as the
record date for the Series K Preferred Stock, may instruct the depositary to
vote the amount of Series K Preferred Stock represented by the holder's
depositary shares. To the extent possible, the depositary will vote the amount
of Series K Preferred Stock represented by depositary shares in accordance
with the instructions it receives. The Company will agree to take all
reasonable actions that the depositary determines are necessary to enable the
depositary to vote as instructed. If the depositary does not receive specific
instructions from the holders of any depositary shares representing the Series
K Preferred Stock, it will vote all depositary shares of that series held by
it proportionately with instructions received.

Listing

The depositary shares are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the
ticker symbol "GS PrK."

Form of Preferred Stock and Depositary Shares

The depositary shares are issued in book-entry form through The Depository
Trust Company. The Series K Preferred Stock is issued in registered form to
the depositary.

DESCRIPTION OF (i) 5.793% FIXED-TO-FLOATING RATE NORMAL AUTOMATIC PREFERRED
ENHANCED CAPITAL SECURITIES OF GOLDMAN SACHS CAPITAL II (FULLY AND
UNCONDITIONALLY GUARANTEED BY THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.) AND (ii) FLOATING
RATE NORMAL AUTOMATIC PREFERRED ENHANCED CAPITAL SECURITIES OF GOLDMAN SACHS
CAPITAL III (FULLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY GUARANTEED BY THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP,
INC.) 

The following is a brief description of the terms of the 5.793% Fixed-to-
Floating Rate Normal Automatic Preferred Enhanced Capital Securities of
Goldman Sachs Capital II and the Floating Rate Normal Automatic Preferred
Enhanced Capital Securities of Goldman Sachs Capital III (the "APEX") and of
the Trust Agreements (both as defined below) under which they are issued. It
does not purport to be complete. Unless the context otherwise provides, all
references to the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries. 

The APEX and the Common Securities of Goldman Sachs Capital II ("Capital II")
and Goldman Sachs Capital III ("Capital III"), each a Delaware statutory trust
(a "Trust"), represent beneficial interests in the relevant Trust. The Trust
in respect of Capital II holds the Company's Perpetual Non-Cumulative
Preferred Stock, Series E (the "Series E Preferred Stock"), and the Trust in
respect of Capital III holds the Company's Perpetual Non-Cumulative Preferred
Stock, Series F (the "Series F Preferred Stock," and collectively with the
Series E Preferred Stock, the "Preferred"). 

Each holder of APEX has a beneficial interest in the relevant Trust but does
not own any specific shares of the Preferred held by that Trust. However, the
applicable trust agreement among the Company, The Bank of New York Mellon, BNY
Mellon Trust of Delaware, the administrative trustees and the several holders
of the relevant Trust securities (each, a "Trust Agreement") under which each
Trust operates defines the financial entitlements of its APEX in a manner that
causes those financial entitlements to correspond to the financial
entitlements of that Trust in the Preferred it holds. Accordingly, each APEX
of Capital II corresponds to 1/100th of a share of Series E Preferred Stock
held by Capital II and each APEX of Capital III corresponds to 1/100th of a
share of Series F Preferred Stock held by Capital III.

The Trusts

Each Trust is a statutory trust organized under Delaware law pursuant to a
Trust Agreement and the filing of a certificate of trust with the Delaware
Secretary of State.

The Trusts are used solely for the following purposes:

issuing the APEX and the Common Securities;  

holding shares of the Preferred; and  

engaging in other activities that are directly related to the activities
described above.  

The Company owns all of the Common Securities, either directly or indirectly.
The Common Securities rank equally with the APEX and the Trusts make payment
on their Trust securities pro rata , except that if the Company pays less
than the full dividend on or redemption price of the Preferred, the rights of
the holders of the Common Securities to payment in respect of distributions
and payments upon liquidation, redemption and otherwise are subordinated to
the rights of the holders of the APEX.

Each Trust is perpetual, but may be dissolved earlier as provided in its Trust
Agreement.

The Company pays all fees and expenses related to the Trusts.

DESCRIPTION OF THE APEX

General

The APEX are securities of each Trust and are issued pursuant to the
applicable Trust Agreement. The Property Trustee, The Bank of New York Mellon,
acts as indenture trustee for the APEX under the Trust Agreement for purposes
of compliance with the provisions of the Trust Indenture Act. Each APEX has a
liquidation amount of $1,000.

The terms of the APEX of each Trust include those stated in the Trust
Agreement for such Trust, including any amendments thereto and those made part
of the Trust Agreement by the Trust Indenture Act and the Delaware Statutory
Trust Act.

In addition to the APEX, each Trust Agreement authorizes the administrative
trustees of the Trust to issue the Common Securities on behalf of the Trust.
The Company owns, directly or indirectly, all of the Common Securities. The
Common Securities rank on a parity, and payments upon redemption, liquidation
or otherwise are made on a proportionate basis, with the APEX except as set
forth below under "- Ranking of Common Securities." The Trust Agreements do
not permit the Trust to issue any securities other than the Common Securities
and the APEX or to incur any indebtedness.

Under the Trust Agreement, the Property Trustee on behalf of the relevant
Trust holds the Preferred for the benefit of the holders of its APEX and
Common Securities.

The payment of distributions out of money held by a Trust, and payments upon
redemption of the APEX or liquidation of the Trust, are guaranteed by the
Company to the extent described under "Description of the Guarantees." Each
Guarantee, when taken together with the Company's obligations under the
applicable Trust Agreement, including its obligations to pay costs, expenses,
debts and liabilities of the Trust, other than with respect to its Common
Securities and APEX, has the effect of providing a full and unconditional
guarantee of amounts due on the APEX. The Bank of New York Mellon, as the
Guarantee Trustee, holds each Guarantee for the benefit of the holders of the
APEX. The Guarantees do not cover payment of distributions when the Trusts do
not have sufficient available funds to pay those distributions.

When the term "holder" is used in this description of the APEX with respect to
a registered APEX, it means the person in whose name such APEX is registered
in the security register. The APEX are currently held in book-entry form only,
and are held in the name of DTC or its nominee.

Capital II's APEX are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol
"GS/PE" and Capital III's APEX are listed on the New York Stock Exchange under
the symbol "GS/PF."

The financial entitlements as a holder of APEX generally correspond to the
applicable Trust's financial entitlements as a holder of the Preferred. The
corresponding asset for each APEX is a 1/100th, or $1,000, interest in one
share of Preferred held by the Trust. Each Trust will pass through to the
holder amounts that it receives on the corresponding assets for the APEX as
distributions on, or the liquidation preference of, APEX. Holders of a Trust's
APEX are be entitled to receive distributions corresponding to non-cumulative
dividends on the Preferred held by the Trust. These cash dividends are payable
if, as and when declared by the Company's board of directors, on the Dividend
Payment Dates (as defined below), which are: quarterly in arrears on each
March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 (or if such day is not a business
day, the next business day).

Assuming that the Company does not elect to pay partial dividends or to skip
dividends on the Preferred, holders of APEX will receive distributions on the
$1,000 liquidation amount per APEX at a rate per annum equal to the greater of
(x) three-month LIBOR for the related distribution period plus 0.765% (in the
case of Capital II's APEX) or 0.77% (in the case of Capital III's APEX) and
(y) 4.000%, payable quarterly on each March 1, June 1, September 1 and
December 1 (or if any such date is not a business day, on the next business
day).

Dividends are calculated on the basis of a 360-day year and the number of days
actually elapsed in the dividend period. Distributions on the APEX and
dividends on the Preferred are non-cumulative.

The Bank of New York Mellon acts as registrar and transfer agent, or "Transfer
Agent," for the APEX. If The Bank of New York Mellon should resign or be
removed, the Company or the Trust will designate a successor and the term
"Transfer Agent" as used herein will refer to that successor. A "business day"
as used in this section means any day other than a Saturday, Sunday or any
other day on which banking institutions and trust companies in New York, New
York or Wilmington, Delaware are permitted or required by any applicable law
to close.

Each Trust must make distributions on its APEX on each distribution date to
the extent that it has funds available therefor. A Trust's funds available for
distribution to a holder of its APEX will be limited to payments received from
the Company on the Preferred held by the Trust. The Company guarantees the
payment of distributions on the APEX out of moneys held by each Trust to the
extent of available Trust funds, as described under "Description of the
Guarantees" below.

Distributions on the APEX are payable to holders as they appear in the
security register of the Trust on the relevant record dates. The record dates
are the fifteenth calendar day immediately preceding the next succeeding
distribution date. Distributions are paid through the Property Trustee or
paying agent, who hold amounts received in respect of the Preferred for the
benefit of the holders of the APEX.

For more information about dividends on the Preferred, see "- Dividends"
below.

Agreed Tax Treatment of the APEX

As a beneficial owner of APEX, by acceptance of the beneficial interest
therein, the holder will be deemed to have agreed, for all U.S. federal income
tax purposes:

to treat the holder as the owner of a 1/100th interest in a share of the
relevant Preferred; and  

to treat the Trust as one or more grantor trusts or agency arrangements.  

Mandatory Redemption of APEX upon Redemption of the Preferred

The APEX have no stated maturity but must be redeemed on the date the Company
redeems the Preferred, and the Property Trustee or paying agent will apply the
proceeds from such repayment or redemption to redeem a like amount, as defined
below, of the APEX. The Preferred is perpetual but the Company may redeem it
on any Dividend Payment Date, subject to certain limitations. See "-
Redemption" below. The redemption price per APEX will equal the redemption
price of the Preferred. See "- Redemption" below. If notice of redemption of
any Preferred has been given and if the funds necessary for the redemption
have been set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of any
shares of the Preferred so called for redemption, then, from and after the
redemption date, those shares shall no longer be deemed outstanding and all
rights of the holders of those shares (including the right to receive any
dividends) will terminate, except the right to receive the redemption price.

If less than all of the shares of the Preferred held by the Trust are to be
redeemed on a redemption date, then the proceeds from such redemption will be
allocated pro rata to the redemption of the APEX and the Common Securities,
except as set forth below under "- Ranking of Common Securities."

The term " like amount " as used above means APEX having a liquidation
amount equal to that portion of the liquidation amount of the Preferred to be
contemporaneously redeemed, the proceeds of which will be used to pay the
redemption price of such APEX.

Distributions to be paid on or before the redemption date for any APEX called
for redemption will be payable to the holders as of the record dates for the
related dates of distribution. If the APEX called for redemption are no longer
in book-entry form, the Property Trustee, to the extent funds are available,
will irrevocably deposit with the paying agent for the APEX funds sufficient
to pay the applicable redemption price and will give such paying agent
irrevocable instructions and authority to pay the redemption price to the
holders thereof upon surrender of their certificates evidencing the APEX.

If notice of redemption shall have been given and funds deposited as required,
then upon the date of such deposit:

all rights of the holders of such APEX called for redemption will cease,
except the right of the holders of such APEX to receive the redemption price
and any distribution payable in respect of the APEX on or prior to the
redemption date, but without interest on such redemption price; and  

the APEX called for redemption will cease to be outstanding. If any redemption
date is not a business day, then the redemption amount will be payable on the
next business day (and without any interest or other payment in respect of any
such delay). However, if payment on the next business day causes payment of
the redemption amount to be in the next calendar month, then payment will be
on the preceding business day.  

If payment of the redemption amount for the Preferred held by a Trust called
for redemption is improperly withheld or refused and accordingly the
redemption amount of the Trust's APEX is not paid either by the Trust or by
the Company under the applicable Guarantee, then dividends on the Preferred
called for redemption will continue to accrue and distributions on such series
of APEX called for redemption will continue to accumulate at the applicable
rate then borne by such APEX from the original redemption date scheduled to
the actual date of payment. In this case, the actual payment date will be
considered the redemption date for purposes of calculating the redemption
amount.

Redemptions of the APEX will require prior approval of the Federal Reserve
Board.

The Company will not exercise its option to redeem any shares of the Preferred
without obtaining the approval of the Federal Reserve Board (or any successor
appropriate federal banking agency) as required by applicable law. Unless the
Federal Reserve Board (or any successor appropriate federal banking agency)
authorizes the Company to do otherwise in writing, the Company will redeem the
Preferred only if it is replaced with other tier 1 capital that is not a
restricted core capital element ( e.g. , common stock or another series of
noncumulative perpetual preferred stock).

If less than all of the outstanding shares of the Preferred held by a Trust
are to be redeemed on a redemption date, then the aggregate liquidation amount
of APEX and Common Securities of that Trust to be redeemed shall be allocated
pro rata to the APEX and Common Securities based upon the relative
liquidation amounts of such series, except as set forth below under "- Ranking
of Common Securities." The Property Trustee will select the particular APEX to
be redeemed on a pro rata basis not more than 60 days before the redemption
date from the outstanding APEX not previously called for redemption by any
method the Property Trustee deems fair and appropriate, or if the APEX are in
book-entry only form, in accordance with the procedures of DTC. The Property
Trustee shall promptly notify the Transfer Agent in writing of the APEX
selected for redemption and, in the case of any APEX selected for redemption
in part, the liquidation amount to be redeemed.

For all purposes of the Trust Agreement, unless the context otherwise
requires, all provisions relating to the redemption of APEX shall relate, in
the case of any APEX redeemed or to be redeemed only in part, to the portion
of the aggregate liquidation amount of APEX that has been or is to be
redeemed. If less than all of the APEX, the APEX held through the facilities
of DTC will be redeemed pro rata in accordance with DTC's internal
procedures.

Liquidation Distribution upon Dissolution

Pursuant to each Trust Agreement, the applicable Trust shall dissolve on the
first to occur of:

certain events of bankruptcy, dissolution or liquidation of the Company;  

redemption of all of its APEX as described above; and  

the entry of an order for the dissolution of the Trust by a court of competent
jurisdiction.  

Except as set forth in the next paragraph, if an early dissolution occurs as a
result of certain events of bankruptcy, dissolution or liquidation of the
Company, the Property Trustee and the administrative trustees will liquidate
the Trust as expeditiously as they determine possible by distributing, after
satisfaction of liabilities to creditors of the Trust as provided by
applicable law, to each holder of its APEX a like amount of the Preferred held
by the Trust as of the date of such distribution. Except as set forth in the
next paragraph, if an early dissolution occurs as a result of the entry of an
order for the dissolution of the Trust by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the Property Trustee will liquidate the Trust as expeditiously as it
determines to be possible by distributing, after satisfaction of liabilities
to creditors of the Trust as provided by applicable law, to each holder of its
APEX a like amount of the Preferred held by the Trust as of the date of such
distribution. The Property Trustee shall give notice of liquidation to each
holder of APEX at least 30 days and not more than 60 days before the date of
liquidation.

If, whether because of an order for dissolution entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction or otherwise, the Property Trustee determines that
distribution of the Preferred in the manner provided above is not possible, or
if the early dissolution occurs as a result of the redemption of all the APEX,
the Property Trustee shall liquidate the property of the Trust and wind up its
affairs. In that case, upon the winding up of the Trust, except with respect
to an early dissolution that occurs as a result of the redemption of all the
APEX, the holders will be entitled to receive out of the assets of the Trust
available for distribution to holders and after satisfaction of liabilities to
creditors of the Trust as provided by applicable law, an amount equal to the
aggregate liquidation amount per Trust security plus accrued and unpaid
distributions to the date of payment. If, upon any such winding up, the Trust
has insufficient assets available to pay in full such aggregate liquidation
distribution, then the amounts payable directly by the Trust on its Trust
securities shall be paid on a pro rata basis, except as set forth below
under "- Ranking of Common Securities."

The term "like amount" as used above means Preferred having a liquidation
preference equal to the liquidation amount of the APEX of the holder to whom
such Preferred would be distributed.

Distribution of Trust Assets

Upon liquidation of a Trust other than as a result of an early dissolution
upon the redemption of all the APEX and after satisfaction of the liabilities
of creditors of the Trust as provided by applicable law, the assets of the
Trust will be distributed to the holders of such Trust securities in exchange
therefor.

After the liquidation date fixed for any distribution of assets of the Trust:

the APEX will no longer be deemed to be outstanding;  

DTC or its nominee, as the record holder of the APEX, will receive a
registered global certificate or certificates representing the Preferred to be
delivered upon such distribution;  

any certificates representing the APEX not held by DTC or its nominee will be
deemed to represent shares of the Preferred having a Liquidation Preference
equal to the APEX until such certificates are so surrendered for transfer and
reissuance; and  

all rights of the holders of the APEX will cease, except the right to receive
Preferred upon such surrender.  

Since each APEX corresponds to 1/100th of a share of Preferred, holders of
APEX may receive fractional shares of the Preferred or depositary shares
representing the Preferred upon this distribution.

Ranking of Common Securities

If on any distribution date a Trust does not have funds available from
dividends on the Preferred it holds to make full distributions on its APEX and
Common Securities, then the available funds from dividends on the Preferred it
holds shall be applied first to make distributions then due on its APEX on a
pro rata basis on such distribution date up to the amount of such
distributions corresponding to dividends on the Preferred (or if less, the
amount of the corresponding distributions that would have been made on the
APEX had the Company paid a full dividend on the Preferred) before any such
amount is applied to make a distribution on the Trust's Common Securities on
such distribution date.

If on any date where APEX and Common Securities must be redeemed because the
Company is redeeming Preferred and a Trust does not have funds available from
the Company's redemption of the Preferred it holds to pay the full redemption
price then due on all of its outstanding APEX and Common Securities to be
redeemed, then (i) the available funds shall be applied first to pay the
redemption price on the APEX to be redeemed on such redemption date and (ii)
Common Securities shall be redeemed only to the extent funds are available for
such purpose after the payment of the full redemption price on the APEX to be
redeemed.

If an early dissolution event occurs in respect of a Trust, no liquidation
distributions shall be made on its Common Securities until full liquidation
distributions have been made on its APEX.

In the case of any event of default under the Trust Agreement of a Trust
resulting from the Company's failure to comply in any material respect with
any of its obligations as issuer of the Preferred held by the Trust, including
obligations set forth in its restated certificate of incorporation, as
amended, or "restated certificate of incorporation," or arising under
applicable law, the Company, as holder of its Common Securities, will be
deemed to have waived any right to act with respect to any such event of
default under the Trust Agreement until the effect of all such events of
default with respect to its APEX have been cured, waived or otherwise
eliminated. Until all events of default under the Trust Agreement have been so
cured, waived or otherwise eliminated, the Property Trustee shall act solely
on behalf of the holders of its APEX and not on the Company's behalf, and only
the holders of its APEX will have the right to direct the Property Trustee to
act on their behalf.

Events of Default; Notice

Any one of the following events constitutes an event of default under a Trust
Agreement, or a "Trust Event of Default," regardless of the reason for such
event of default and whether it shall be voluntary or involuntary or be
effected by operation of law or pursuant to any judgment, decree or order of
any court or any order, rule or regulation of any administrative or
governmental body:

the failure to comply in any material respect with the Company's obligations
as issuer of the Preferred, under its restated certificate of incorporation,
or those of the Trust, or arising under applicable law;  

the default by the Trust in the payment of any distribution on any Trust
security of the Trust when such becomes due and payable, and continuation of
such default for a period of 30 days;  

the default by the Trust in the payment of any redemption price of any Trust
security of the Trust when such becomes due and payable;  

the failure to perform or the breach, in any material respect, of any other
covenant or warranty of the trustees in the Trust Agreement for 90 days after
the defaulting trustee or trustees have received written notice of the failure
to perform or breach in the manner specified in such Trust Agreement; or  

the occurrence of certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency with respect to
the Property Trustee and the Company's failure to appoint a successor Property
Trustee within 90 days.  

Within 30 days after any Trust Event of Default with respect to a Trust
actually known to the Property Trustee occurs, the Property Trustee will
transmit notice of such Trust Event of Default to the holders of its APEX and
to the administrative trustees, unless such Trust Event of Default shall have
been cured or waived. The Company, as sponsor, and the administrative trustees
are required to file annually with the Property Trustee a certificate as to
whether or not the Company or the administrative trustees are in compliance
with all the conditions and covenants applicable to the Company and to the
administrative trustees under the Trust Agreement.

Mergers, Consolidations, Amalgamations or Replacements of a Trust

A Trust may not merge with or into, consolidate, amalgamate, or be replaced
by, or convey, transfer or lease its properties and assets substantially as an
entirety to the Company or any other person, except as described below or as
otherwise described in its Trust Agreement. A Trust may, at the Company's
request, with the consent of the administrative trustees but without the
consent of the holders of its APEX, the Property Trustee or the Delaware
Trustee, merge with or into, consolidate, amalgamate, or be replaced by, or
convey, transfer or lease its properties and assets substantially as an
entirety to, a trust organized as such under the laws of any state if:

such successor entity either:  

expressly assumes all of the obligations of the Trust with respect to its
APEX, or  

substitutes for its APEX other securities having substantially the same terms
as its APEX, or the "Successor Securities," so long as the Successor
Securities rank the same as its APEX in priority with respect to distributions
and payments upon liquidation, redemption and otherwise;  

a trustee of such successor entity possessing the same powers and duties as
the Property Trustee is appointed to hold the Preferred then held by or on
behalf of the Property Trustee;  

such merger, consolidation, amalgamation, replacement, conveyance, transfer or
lease does not cause its APEX, including any Successor Securities, to be
downgraded by any nationally recognized statistical rating organization;  

such merger, consolidation, amalgamation, replacement, conveyance, transfer or
lease does not adversely affect the rights, preferences and privileges of the
holders of its APEX, including any Successor Securities, in any material
respect;  

such successor entity has purposes substantially identical to those of the
Trust;  

prior to such merger, consolidation, amalgamation, replacement, conveyance,
transfer or lease, the Property Trustee has received an opinion from counsel
to the Trust experienced in such matters to the effect that:  

such merger, consolidation, amalgamation, replacement, conveyance, transfer or
lease does not adversely affect the rights, preferences and privileges of the
holders of its APEX, including any Successor Securities, in any material
respect, and  

following such merger, consolidation, amalgamation, replacement, conveyance,
transfer or lease, neither the Trust nor such successor entity will be
required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act
of 1940, or "Investment Company Act";  

the Trust has received an opinion of counsel experienced in such matters that
such merger, consolidation, amalgamation, conveyance, transfer or lease will
not cause the Trust or the successor entity to be classified as an association
or a publicly traded partnership taxable as a corporation for U.S. federal
income tax purposes; and  

the Company or any permitted successor or assignee owns all of the common
securities of such successor entity and guarantees the obligations of such
successor entity under the Successor Securities at least to the extent
provided by the Guarantee.  

Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Trust may not, except with the consent of
holders of 100% in liquidation amount of its APEX, consolidate, amalgamate,
merge with or into, or be replaced by or convey, transfer or lease its
properties and assets substantially as an entirety to any other entity or
permit any other entity to consolidate, amalgamate, merge with or into, or
replace it if such consolidation, amalgamation, merger, replacement,
conveyance, transfer or lease would cause the Trust or the successor entity to
be classified as other than one or more grantor trusts or agency arrangements
or to be classified as an association or a publicly traded partnership taxable
as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes.

Voting Rights; Amendment of a Trust Agreement

Except as provided herein and under "- Amendments and Assignment" below and as
otherwise required by law and the Trust Agreement, the holders of a Trust's
APEX have no voting rights or control over the administration, operation or
management of the Trust or the obligations of the parties to its Trust
Agreement, including in respect of the Preferred held by the Trust. Under the
Trust Agreement, however, the Property Trustee is required to obtain their
consent before exercising some of its rights in respect of these securities.

Trust Agreement. The Company and the administrative trustees may amend a
Trust's Trust Agreement without the consent of the holders of its APEX, the
Property Trustee or the Delaware Trustee, unless in the case of the first two
bullets below such amendment will materially and adversely affect the
interests of any holder of APEX or the Property Trustee or the Delaware
Trustee or impose any additional duty or obligation on the Property Trustee or
the Delaware Trustee, to:

cure any ambiguity, correct or supplement any provisions in the Trust
Agreement that may be inconsistent with any other provision, or to make any
other provisions with respect to matters or questions arising under the Trust
Agreement, which may not be inconsistent with the other provisions of the
Trust Agreement;  

modify, eliminate or add to any provisions of the Trust Agreement to such
extent as shall be necessary to ensure that the Trust will be classified for
U.S. federal income tax purposes as one or more grantor trusts or agency
arrangements and not as an association or a publicly traded partnership
taxable as a corporation at all times that any Trust securities are
outstanding, or to ensure that the Trust will not be required to register as
an "investment company" under the Investment Company Act;  

provide that certificates for the APEX may be executed by an administrative
trustee by facsimile signature instead of manual signature, in which case such
amendment(s) shall also provide for the appointment by the Company of an
authentication agent and certain related provisions;  

require that holders that are not U.S. persons for U.S. federal income tax
purposes irrevocably appoint a U.S. person to exercise any voting rights to
ensure that the Trust will not be treated as a foreign trust for U.S. federal
income tax purposes; or  

conform the terms of the Trust Agreement to the description of the Trust
Agreement, the APEX and the Common Securities in the prospectus dated December
5, 2006, of the Company and the Trusts, as supplemented by the prospectus
supplement, dated May 8, 2007, in the manner provided in the Trust Agreement.  

Any such amendment shall become effective when notice thereof is given to the
Property Trustee, the Delaware Trustee and the holders of the APEX.

The Company and the administrative trustees may generally amend a Trust's
Trust Agreement with:

the consent of holders representing not less than a majority, based upon
liquidation amounts, of its APEX; and  

receipt by the administrative trustees of the Trust of an opinion of counsel
to the effect that such amendment or the exercise of any power granted to the
administrative trustees of the Trust or the administrative trustees in
accordance with such amendment will not affect the Trust's status as one or
more grantor trusts or agency arrangements for U.S. federal income tax
purposes or affect the Trust's exemption from status as an "investment
company" under the Investment Company Act.  

However, without the consent of each affected holder of Trust securities, a
Trust Agreement may not be amended to:

change the amount or timing, or otherwise adversely affect the amount, of any
distribution required to be made in respect of Trust securities as of a
specified date; or  

restrict the right of a holder of Trust securities to institute a suit for the
enforcement of any such payment on or after such date.  

Preferred Stock . So long as Preferred is held by the Property
Trustee on behalf of a Trust, the trustees of the Trust will not waive any
rights in respect of the Preferred without obtaining the prior approval of the
holders of at least a majority in liquidation amount of its APEX then
outstanding. The trustees of the Trust shall also not consent to any amendment
to the Trust's or the Company's governing documents that would change the
dates on which dividends are payable or the amount of such dividends, without
the prior written consent of each holder of APEX. In addition to obtaining the
foregoing approvals from holders, the administrative trustees shall obtain, at
the Company's expense, an opinion of counsel to the effect that such action
shall not cause the Trust to be taxable as a corporation or classified as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes.

General. Any required approval of holders of APEX may be given at a
meeting of holders convened for such purpose or pursuant to written consent.
The Property Trustee will cause a notice of any meeting at which holders are
entitled to vote, or of any matter upon which action by written consent of
such holders is to be taken, to be given to each record holder in the manner
set forth in the Trust Agreement.

No vote or consent of the holders of APEX will be required for a Trust to
redeem and cancel the APEX in accordance with a Trust Agreement.

Notwithstanding that holders of the APEX are entitled to vote or consent under
any of the circumstances described above, any of the APEX that are owned by
the Company or its affiliates or the trustees shall be deemed not to be
outstanding.

Payment and Paying Agent

Payments on the APEX shall be made to DTC, which shall credit the relevant
accounts on the applicable distribution dates. If any APEX are not held by
DTC, such payments shall be made by check mailed to the address of the holder
as such address shall appear on the register.

The paying agent is The Bank of New York Mellon and any co-paying agent chosen
by the Property Trustee and acceptable to the Company and to the
administrative trustees.

Registrar and Transfer Agent

The Bank of New York Mellon acts as registrar and transfer agent, or "Transfer
Agent," for the APEX.

Information Concerning the Property Trustee

Other than during the occurrence and continuance of a Trust Event of Default,
the Property Trustee undertakes to perform only the duties that are
specifically set forth in the Trust Agreement. After a Trust Event of Default,
the Property Trustee must exercise the same degree of care and skill as a
prudent individual would exercise or use in the conduct of his or her own
affairs. Subject to this provision, the Property Trustee is under no
obligation to exercise any of the powers vested in it by the Trust Agreement
at the request of any holder of APEX unless it is offered indemnity
satisfactory to it by such holder against the costs, expenses and liabilities
that might be incurred. If no Trust Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing and the Property Trustee is required to decide between alternative
courses of action, construe ambiguous provisions in the Trust Agreement or is
unsure of the application of any provision of the Trust Agreement, and the
matter is not one upon which holders of APEX are entitled under the Trust
Agreement to vote, then the Property Trustee will take any action that the
Company directs. If the Company does not provide direction, the Property
Trustee may take any action that it deems advisable and in the interests of
the holders of the Trust securities and will have no liability except for its
own bad faith, negligence or willful misconduct.

The Company and its affiliates may maintain certain accounts and other banking
relationships with the Property Trustee and its affiliates in the ordinary
course of business.

Trust Expenses

Pursuant to each Trust Agreement, the Company, as sponsor, agrees to pay:

all debts and other obligations of the Trust (other than with respect to its
APEX);  

all costs and expenses of the Trust, including costs and expenses relating to
the organization of the Trust, the fees, expenses and indemnities of the
trustees and the cost and expenses relating to the operation of the Trust; and  

any and all taxes and costs and expenses with respect thereto, other than U.S.
withholding taxes, to which the Trust might become subject.  

Governing Law

Each Trust Agreement is governed by and construed in accordance with the laws
of the State of Delaware.

Miscellaneous

The administrative trustees are authorized and directed to conduct the affairs
of and to operate each Trust in such a way that it will not be required to
register as an "investment company" under the Investment Company Act or
characterized as other than one or more grantor trusts or agency arrangements
for U.S. federal income tax purposes.

In this regard, the Company and the administrative trustees are authorized to
take any action, not inconsistent with applicable law, the certificate of
trust of a Trust or its Trust Agreement, that the Company and the
administrative trustees determine to be necessary or desirable to achieve such
end, as long as such action does not materially and adversely affect the
interests of the holders of the APEX.

Holders of the APEX have no preemptive or similar rights. The APEX are not
convertible into or exchangeable for the Company's common stock or preferred
stock.

Subject to any applicable rules of the Federal Reserve Board (or any successor
appropriate federal banking agency), the Company or its affiliates may from
time to time purchase any of the APEX that are then outstanding by tender, in
the open market or by private agreement.

The Trust may not borrow money or issue debt or mortgage or pledge any of its
assets.

DESCRIPTION OF THE GUARANTEES

The following is a brief description of the terms of the Guarantee (as
defined below) pursuant to the Guarantee Agreement for Goldman Sachs Capital
II (formerly known as Goldman Sachs Capital IV), dated as of March 23, 2016,
and the Guarantee Agreement for Goldman Sachs Capital III (formerly known as
Goldman Sachs Capital V), dated as of March 23, 2016 (collectively, the
"Guarantee Agreements"). The description does not purport to be complete.

General

The following payments on each Trust's APEX, also referred to as the
"guarantee payments," if not fully paid by the Trust, will be paid by the
Company under a guarantee, or "Guarantee," that the Company has executed and
delivered for the benefit of the holders of such APEX. Pursuant to each
Guarantee, the Company irrevocably and unconditionally agrees to pay in full
the guarantee payments, without duplication:

any accumulated and unpaid distributions required to be paid on the APEX, to
the extent the Trust has funds available to make the payment;  

the redemption price for any APEX called for redemption, to the extent the
Trust has funds available to make the payment; and  

upon a voluntary or involuntary dissolution, winding up or liquidation of the
Trust, other than in connection with a distribution of a like amount of
corresponding assets to the holders of the APEX, the lesser of:  

the aggregate of the liquidation amount and all accumulated and unpaid
distributions on the APEX to the date of payment, to the extent the Trust has
funds available to make the payment; and  

the amount of assets of the Trust remaining available for distribution to
holders of the APEX upon liquidation of the Trust.  

The Company's obligation to make a guarantee payment may be satisfied by
direct payment of the required amounts by the Company to the holders of the
APEX or by causing the Trust to pay the amounts to the holders.

If the Company does not make a regular dividend payment on the Preferred held
by a Trust, the Trust will not have sufficient funds to make the related
payments on the relevant series of APEX. The Guarantee does not cover payments
on the APEX when the Trust does not have sufficient funds to make these
payments. Because the Company is a holding company, its rights to participate
in the assets of any of its subsidiaries upon the subsidiary's liquidation or
reorganization will be subject to the prior claims of the subsidiary's
creditors except to the extent that the Company may itself be a creditor with
recognized claims against the subsidiary. The Guarantee does not limit the
incurrence or issuance by the Company of other secured or unsecured
indebtedness.

Each Guarantee is qualified as an indenture under the Trust Indenture Act. The
Bank of New York Mellon acts as "Guarantee Trustee" for each Guarantee for
purposes of compliance with the provisions of the Trust Indenture Act. The
Guarantee Trustee holds each Guarantee for the benefit of the holders of APEX.

Effect of the Guarantees

Each Guarantee, when taken together with the Company's obligations and the
Trust's obligations under the Trust Agreement, including the obligations to
pay costs, expenses, debts and liabilities of the applicable Trust, other than
with respect to its Trust securities, has the effect of providing a full and
unconditional guarantee, on a subordinated basis, of payments due on its APEX.

The Company has also agreed separately to irrevocably and unconditionally
guarantee the obligations of each Trust with respect to its Common Securities
to the same extent as the Guarantee.

Status of the Guarantees

Each Guarantee is unsecured and ranks:

subordinate and junior in right of payment to all of the Company's senior and
subordinated debt; and  

equally with any of the Company's other present or future obligations that by
their terms rank pari passu with such Guarantee.  

Each Guarantee constitutes a guarantee of payment and not of collection, which
means that the guaranteed party may sue the guarantor to enforce its rights
under the Guarantee without suing any other person or entity. Each Guarantee
is held for the benefit of the holders of APEX. Each Guarantee will be
discharged only by payment of the guarantee payments in full to the extent not
paid by the applicable Trust.

Amendments and Assignment

A Guarantee may be amended only with the prior approval of the holders of not
less than a majority in aggregate liquidation amount of the applicable
outstanding APEX. No vote is required, however, for any changes that do not
adversely affect the rights of holders of APEX in any material respect. All
guarantees and agreements contained in the Guarantee bind the Company's
successors, assignees, receivers, trustees and representatives and are for the
benefit of the holders of the applicable APEX then outstanding.

Termination of the Guarantees

A Guarantee will terminate:

upon full payment of the redemption price of all applicable APEX; or  

upon full payment of the amounts payable in accordance with the Trust
Agreement upon liquidation of the Trust.  

A Guarantee will continue to be effective or will be reinstated, as the case
may be, if at any time any holder of APEX must restore payment of any sums
paid under the APEX or the Guarantee.

Events of Default

An event of default under a Guarantee will occur if the Company fails to
perform any payment obligation or if the Company fails to perform any other
obligation under the Guarantee and such default remains unremedied for 30
days.

The holders of a majority in liquidation amount of the applicable APEX have
the right to direct the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding
for any remedy available to the Guarantee Trustee in respect of a Guarantee or
to direct the exercise of any trust or power conferred upon the Guarantee
Trustee under the Guarantee. Any holder of APEX may institute a legal
proceeding directly against the Company to enforce the Guarantee Trustee's
rights and the Company's obligations under a Guarantee, without first
instituting a legal proceeding against the Trust, the Guarantee Trustee or any
other person or entity.

As guarantor, the Company is required to file annually with the Guarantee
Trustee a certificate as to whether or not the Company is in compliance with
all applicable conditions and covenants under the Guarantee.

Information Concerning the Guarantee Trustee

Prior to the occurrence of an event of default relating to a Guarantee, the
Guarantee Trustee is required to perform only the duties that are specifically
set forth in the Guarantees. Following the occurrence of an event of default,
the Guarantee Trustee will exercise the same degree of care as a prudent
individual would exercise in the conduct of his or her own affairs. Provided
that the foregoing requirements have been met, the Guarantee Trustee is under
no obligation to exercise any of the powers vested in it by the Guarantees at
the request of any holder of APEX, unless offered indemnity satisfactory to it
against the costs, expenses and liabilities which might be incurred thereby.

The Company and its affiliates may maintain certain accounts and other banking
relationships with the Guarantee Trustee and its affiliates in the ordinary
course of business.

Governing Law

The Guarantees are governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of
the State of New York.

Limited Purpose of Trust

The Trust securities evidence beneficial interests in the Trust. A principal
difference between the rights of a holder of a Trust security and a holder of
Preferred is that a holder of Preferred would be entitled to receive from the
issuer the dividends, redemption payments and payment upon liquidation in
respect of Preferred while a holder of Trust securities is entitled to receive
distributions from a Trust, or from the Company under a Guarantee, if and to
the extent the Trust has funds available for the payment of such
distributions.

Rights upon Dissolution

Upon any voluntary or involuntary dissolution of the Trust, holders of each
series of APEX will receive the distributions described under "- Liquidation
Distribution upon Dissolution" above. Upon any voluntary or involuntary
liquidation or bankruptcy of the Company, the holders of the Preferred would
be preferred shareholders of the Company, entitled to the preferences upon
liquidation described under "Description of the Preferred" below. Since the
Company is the guarantor under the Guarantee and has agreed to pay for all
costs, expenses and liabilities of the Trust, other than the Trust's
obligations to the holders of the Trust securities, the positions of a holder
of APEX relative to other creditors and to the Company's shareholders in the
event of liquidation or bankruptcy are expected to be substantially the same
as if that holder held the corresponding assets of the Trust directly.

DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED

The following is a brief description of the terms of the Preferred held by
the relevant Trust. This summary does not purport to be complete and is
subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the Company's
restated certificate of incorporation, which is an exhibit to the Annual
Report of which this exhibit is a part.

General

The Company's authorized capital stock includes 150,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share (including the Preferred).

Shares of the Preferred rank senior to the Company's common stock, equally
with each other series of the Company's preferred stock outstanding as of
December 31, 2020, and at least equally with each other series of preferred
stock that the Company may issue (except for any senior series that may be
issued with the requisite consent of the holders of the Preferred), with
respect to the payment of dividends and distributions of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up. The Preferred is fully paid and
nonassessable, which means that its holders have paid their purchase price in
full and that the Company may not ask them to surrender additional funds.
Holders of the Preferred do not have preemptive or subscription rights to
acquire more preferred stock of the Company. The Preferred is not convertible
into, or exchangeable for, shares of any other class or series of stock or
other securities of the Company. The Preferred has no stated maturity and is
not subject to any sinking fund or other obligation of the Company to redeem
or repurchase the Preferred.

The Preferred has a fixed liquidation preference of $100,000 per share. If the
Company liquidates, dissolves or winds up its affairs, holders of the
Preferred will be entitled to receive, out of the Company's assets that are
available for distribution to shareholders, an amount per share equal to the
liquidation preference per share, plus any declared and unpaid dividends,
without regard to any undeclared dividends.

Unless the Trust is dissolved prior to the redemption of the Preferred,
holders of APEX will not receive shares of the Preferred, and their interest
in the Preferred will be represented by their APEX. If the Trust is dissolved,
the Company may elect to distribute depositary shares representing the
Preferred instead of fractional shares. Since the Preferred is held by the
Property Trustee, holders of APEX are only able to exercise voting or other
rights with respect to the Preferred through the Property Trustee.

Dividends

Dividends on shares of the Preferred are not mandatory. Holders of the
Preferred are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared by the Company's
board of directors (or a duly authorized committee of the board), out of funds
legally available for the payment of dividends under Delaware law, non-
cumulative cash dividends from the date of their issuance. These dividends are
payable on March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 of each year (each, for
purposes of this section, a "Dividend Payment Date"), with respect to the
Dividend Period, or portion thereof, ending on the day preceding the
respective Dividend Payment Date, at a rate per annum equal to the greater of
(x) three-month LIBOR for the related distribution period plus 0.765% (in the
case of the Series E Preferred Stock) or 0.77% (in the case of the Series F
Preferred Stock) and (y) 4.000%.

Dividends are payable to holders of record of the Preferred as they appear on
the Company's books on the applicable record date, which shall be the 15th
calendar day before that Dividend Payment Date or such other record date fixed
by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized committee of the
board) that is not more than 60 nor less than 10 days prior to such Dividend
Payment Date (each, for purposes of this section, a "Dividend Record Date").
These Dividend Record Dates apply regardless of whether a particular Dividend
Record Date is a business day.

A "Dividend Period" is the period from and including a Dividend Payment Date
to but excluding the next Dividend Payment Date. If any that would otherwise
be a Dividend Payment Date is not a business day, then the next business day
will be the applicable Dividend Payment Date.

The amount of dividends payable per share of the Preferred on each Dividend
Payment Date is calculated by multiplying the per annum Dividend Rate in
effect for that Dividend Period by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
actual number of days in that Dividend Period and the denominator of which is
360, and multiplying the rate obtained by $100,000.

For any Dividend Period, LIBOR shall be determined by Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC,
as calculation agent for the Preferred, on the second London business day
immediately preceding the first day of such Dividend Period, as the case may
be, in the following manner:

LIBOR will be the offered rate per annum for three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such period, as that rate appears on
Reuters Screen LIBOR01 (or any successor or replacement page) as of 11:00
A.M., London time, on the second London business day immediately preceding the
first day of such Dividend Period or Interest Period, as the case may be.  

If the rate described above does not appear on Reuters Screen LIBOR01 (or any
successor or replacement page), LIBOR will be determined on the basis of the
rates, at approximately 11:00 A.M., London time, on the second London business
day immediately preceding the first day of such Dividend Period or Interest
Period, as the case may be, at which deposits of the following kind are
offered to prime banks in the London interbank market by four major banks in
that market selected by the calculation agent: three-month deposits in U.S.
dollars, beginning on the first day of such Dividend Period or Interest
Period, as the case may be, and in a Representative Amount. The calculation
agent will request the principal London office of each of these banks to
provide a quotation of its rate. If at least two quotations are provided,
LIBOR for the second London business day immediately preceding the first day
of such Dividend Period or Interest Period, as the case may be, will be the
arithmetic mean of the quotations.  

If fewer than two quotations are provided as described above, LIBOR for the
second London business day immediately preceding the first day of such
Dividend Period or Interest Period, as the case may be, will be the arithmetic
mean of the rates for loans of the following kind to leading European banks
quoted, at approximately 11:00 A.M. New York City time on the second London
business day immediately preceding the first day of such Dividend Period or
Interest Period, as the case may be, by three major banks in New York City
selected by the calculation agent: three-month loans of U.S. dollars,
beginning on the first day of such Dividend Period, and in a Representative
Amount.  

If fewer than three banks selected by the calculation agent are quoting as
described above, LIBOR for the new Dividend Period will be LIBOR in effect for
the prior Dividend Period or Interest Period, as the case may be.  

The calculation agent's determination of any dividend rate, and its
calculation of the amount of dividends for any Dividend Period, will be on
file at the Company's principal offices, will be made available to any
stockholder upon request and will be final and binding in the absence of
manifest error.

This subsection uses several terms that have special meanings relevant to
calculating LIBOR. Those terms have the following meanings:

The term "Representative Amount" means an amount that, in the calculation
agent's judgment, is representative of a single transaction in the relevant
market at the relevant time.

"Reuters Screen LIBOR01 Page" means the display designated on the Reuters 3000
Xtra (or such other page as may replace that page on that service or such
other service as may be nominated by the British Bankers' Association for the
purpose of displaying London interbank offered rates for U.S. Dollar
deposits).

The term "business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday or Friday and is not a day on which banking institutions in New York
City generally are authorized or obligated by law or executive order to close.

The term "London business day" means a day that is a Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday and is a day on which dealings in U.S. dollars
are transacted in the London interbank market. If the Company determines not
to pay any dividend or a full dividend, the Company will provide prior written
notice to the Property Trustee, who will notify holders of APEX, and the
administrative trustees.

Dividends on the Preferred are not cumulative. Accordingly, if the board of
directors of the Company (or a duly authorized committee of the board) does
not declare a dividend on the Preferred payable in respect of any Dividend
Period before the related Dividend Payment Date, such dividend will not accrue
and the Company will have no obligation to pay a dividend for that Dividend
Period on the Dividend Payment Date or at any future time, whether or not
dividends on the Preferred are declared for any future Dividend Period.

So long as any share of Preferred remains outstanding, no dividend shall be
paid or declared on the Company's common stock or any other shares of the
Company's junior stock (as defined below) (other than a dividend payable
solely in junior stock), and no common stock or other junior stock shall be
purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for consideration by the Company,
directly or indirectly (other than as a result of a reclassification of junior
stock for or into other Junior Stock, or the exchange or conversion of one
share of junior stock for or into another share of junior stock and other than
through the use of the proceeds of a substantially contemporaneous sale of
junior stock), during a Dividend Period, unless the full dividends for the
latest completed Dividend Period on all outstanding shares of Preferred have
been declared and paid (or declared and a sum sufficient for the payment
thereof has been set aside). However, the foregoing provision shall not
restrict the ability of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or any of the Company's other
affiliates, to engage in any market-making transactions in the Company's
junior stock in the ordinary course of business.

As used in this description of the Preferred, "junior stock" means any class
or series of stock of the Company that ranks junior to the Preferred either as
to the payment of dividends or as to the distribution of assets upon any
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company's junior stock includes
the Company's common stock.

When dividends are not paid (or declared and a sum sufficient for payment
thereof set aside) on any Dividend Payment Date (or, in the case of parity
stock, as defined below, having Dividend Payment Dates different from the
Dividend Payment Dates pertaining to the Preferred, on a Dividend Payment Date
falling within the related Dividend Period for the Preferred) in full upon the
Preferred and any shares of parity stock, all dividends declared upon the
Preferred and all such equally ranking securities payable on such Dividend
Payment Date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment dates
different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Preferred, on a
dividend payment date falling within the related Dividend Period for the
Preferred) shall be declared pro rata so that the respective amounts of such
dividends shall bear the same ratio to each other as all accrued but unpaid
dividends per share on the Preferred and all parity stock payable on such
Dividend Payment Date (or, in the case of parity stock having dividend payment
dates different from the dividend payment dates pertaining to the Preferred,
on a dividend payment date falling within the related Dividend Period for the
Preferred) bear to each other.

As used in this description of the Preferred, "parity stock" means any other
class or series of stock of the Company that ranks equally with the Preferred
in the payment of dividends and in the distribution of assets on any
liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company.

Subject to the foregoing, such dividends (payable in cash, stock or otherwise)
as may be determined by the Company's board of directors (or a duly authorized
committee of the board) may be declared and paid on the Company's common stock
and any other stock ranking equally with or junior to the Preferred from time
to time out of any funds legally available for such payment, and the shares of
the Preferred shall not be entitled to participate in any such dividend.

Redemption

The Preferred may be redeemed (but subject to applicable regulatory limits) in
whole or in part, at the Company's option. Any such redemption will be at a
cash redemption price of $100,000 per share, plus any declared and unpaid
dividends including, without regard to any undeclared dividends. Holders of
Preferred have no right to require the redemption or repurchase of the
Preferred. If notice of redemption of any Preferred has been given and if the
funds necessary for the redemption have been set aside by the Company for the
benefit of the holders of any shares of the Preferred so called for
redemption, then, from and after the redemption date, those shares shall no
longer be deemed outstanding and all rights of the holders of those shares
(including the right to receive any dividends) will terminate, except the
right to receive the redemption price.

If fewer than all of the outstanding shares of the Preferred are to be
redeemed, the shares to be redeemed will be selected either pro rata from
the holders of record of shares of the Preferred in proportion to the number
of shares held by those holders or by lot or in such other manner as the
Company's board of directors or a committee thereof may determine to be fair
and equitable.

The Company will mail notice of every redemption of Preferred by first class
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the holders of record of the Preferred to
be redeemed at their respective last addresses appearing on the Company's
books. This mailing will be at least 30 days and not more than 60 days before
the date fixed for redemption ( provided that if the Preferred is held in
book-entry form through DTC, the Company may give this notice in any manner
permitted by DTC). Any notice mailed or otherwise given as provided in this
paragraph will be conclusively presumed to have been duly given, whether or
not the holder receives this notice, and failure duly to give this notice by
mail or otherwise, or any defect in this notice or in the mailing or provision
of this notice, to any holder of Preferred designated for redemption will not
affect the redemption of any other Preferred. If the Company redeems the
Preferred, the Trust, as holder of the Preferred, will redeem the
corresponding APEX as described under "- Mandatory Redemption of APEX upon
Redemption of Preferred."

Each notice shall state:

the redemption date;  

the number of shares of the Preferred to be redeemed and, if less than all
shares of the Preferred held by the holder are to be redeemed, the number of
shares to be redeemed from the holder;  

the redemption price; and  

the place or places where the Preferred is to be redeemed.  

The Company's right to redeem the Preferred once issued is subject to prior
approval of the Federal Reserve Board (or any successor banking agency).

Liquidation Rights

Upon any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of
the Company, holders of the Preferred are entitled to receive out of assets of
the Company available for distribution to stockholders, after satisfaction of
liabilities to creditors, if any, before any distribution of assets is made to
holders of common stock or of any of the Company's other shares of stock
ranking junior as to such a distribution to the shares of the Preferred, a
liquidating distribution in the amount of $100,000 per share, plus declared
and unpaid dividends, without accumulation of any undeclared dividends.
Holders of the Preferred are not entitled to any other amounts from the
Company after they have received their full liquidation preference.

In any such distribution, if the assets of the Company are not sufficient to
pay the liquidation preferences in full to all holders of the Preferred and
all holders of any other shares of the Company's stock ranking equally as to
such distribution with the Preferred, the amounts paid to the holders of the
Preferred and to the holders of all such other stock will be paid pro rata
in accordance with the respective aggregate liquidation preferences of those
holders. In any such distribution, the "liquidation preference" of any holder
of preferred stock means the amount payable to such holder in such
distribution, including any declared but unpaid dividends (and any unpaid,
accrued cumulative dividends in the case of any holder of stock on which
dividends accrue on a cumulative basis). If the liquidation preference has
been paid in full to all holders of Preferred and any other shares of the
Company's stock ranking equally as to the liquidation distribution, the
holders of the Company's other stock shall be entitled to receive all
remaining assets of the Company according to their respective rights and
preferences.

For purposes of this description of the Preferred, the merger or consolidation
of the Company with any other entity, including a merger or consolidation in
which the holders of Preferred receive cash, securities or property for their
shares, or the sale, lease or exchange of all or substantially all of the
assets of the Company for cash, securities or other property shall not
constitute a liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company.

Voting Rights

Except as provided below, the holders of the Preferred have no voting rights.

Whenever dividends on any shares of the Preferred shall have not been declared
and paid for a period the equivalent of six or more dividend payments, whether
or not consecutive, equivalent to at least 18 months Dividend Periods (as used
in this section, a "Nonpayment"), the holders of such shares, voting together
as a class with holders of any and all other series of voting preferred stock
(as defined below) then outstanding, will be entitled to vote for the election
of a total of two additional members of the Company's board of directors (as
used in this section, the "Preferred Stock Directors"), provided that the
election of any such director shall not cause the Company to violate the
corporate governance requirement of the New York Stock Exchange (or any other
exchange on which the Company's securities may be listed) that listed
companies must have a majority of independent directors and provided further
that the Company's board of directors shall at no time include more than two
Preferred Stock Directors. In that event, the number of directors on the
Company's board of directors shall automatically increase by two, and the new
directors shall be elected at a special meeting called at the request of the
holders of record of at least 20% of the Preferred or of any other series of
voting preferred stock (unless such request is received less than 90 days
before the date fixed for the next annual or special meeting of the
stockholders, in which event such election shall be held at such next annual
or special meeting of stockholders), and at each subsequent annual meeting.
These voting rights will continue until dividends on the shares of the
Preferred and any such series of voting preferred stock for at least one year
four Dividend Periods, whether or not consecutive, following the Nonpayment
shall have been fully paid (or declared and a sum sufficient for the payment
of such dividends shall have been set aside for payment).

As used in this description of the Preferred, "voting preferred stock" means
any other class or series of preferred stock of the Company ranking equally
with the Preferred either as to dividends or the distribution of assets upon
liquidation, dissolution or winding up and upon which like voting rights have
been conferred and are exercisable. Whether a plurality, majority or other
portion of the shares of the Preferred and any other voting preferred stock
have been voted in favor of any matter shall be determined by reference to the
liquidation amounts of the shares voted.

If and when dividends for at least four Dividend Periods, whether or not
consecutive, following a Nonpayment have been paid in full (or declared and a
sum sufficient for such payment shall have been set aside), the holders of the
Preferred shall be divested of the foregoing voting rights (subject to
revesting in the event of each subsequent Nonpayment) and, if such voting
rights for all other holders of voting preferred stock have terminated, the
term of office of each Preferred Stock Director so elected shall terminate and
the number of directors on the board of directors shall automatically decrease
by two. In determining whether dividends have been paid for at least four
Dividend Periods, whether or not consecutive, the Company may take account of
any dividend the Company elects to pay for a Dividend Period after the regular
dividend date for that period has passed. Any Preferred Stock Director may be
removed at any time without cause by the holders of record of a majority of
the outstanding shares of the Preferred when they have the voting rights
described above (voting together as a class with all series of voting
preferred stock then outstanding). So long as a Nonpayment shall continue, any
vacancy in the office of a Preferred Stock Director (other than prior to the
initial election after a Nonpayment) may be filled by the written consent of
the Preferred Stock Director remaining in office, or if none remains in
office, by a vote of the holders of record of a majority of the outstanding
shares of the Preferred and all voting preferred stock when they have the
voting rights described above (voting together as a class). The Preferred
Stock Directors shall each be entitled to one vote per director on any matter.

So long as any shares of the Preferred remain outstanding, the Company will
not, without the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at least two-
thirds of the outstanding shares of the Preferred and all other series of
voting preferred stock entitled to vote thereon, voting together as a single
class, given in person or by proxy, either in writing or at a meeting:

authorized amount of, any class or series of stock ranking senior to the
Preferred with respect to payment of dividends or the distribution of assets
upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;  

amend, alter or repeal the provisions of the Company's restated certificate of
incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect the special rights,
preferences, privileges and voting powers of the Preferred, taken as a whole;
or  

consummate a binding share exchange or reclassification involving the
Preferred or a merger or consolidation of the Company with another entity,
unless in each case (i) the shares of the Preferred remain outstanding or, in
the case of any such merger or consolidation with respect to which the Company
is not the surviving or resulting entity, are converted into or exchanged for
preference securities of the surviving or resulting entity or its ultimate
parent, and (ii) such shares remaining outstanding or such preference
securities, as the case may be, have such rights, preferences, privileges and
voting powers, taken as a whole, as are not materially less favorable to the
holders thereof than the rights, preferences, privileges and voting powers of
the Preferred, taken as a whole;  

provided , however , that any increase in the amount of the authorized or
issued Preferred or other authorized preferred stock or the creation and
issuance, or an increase in the authorized or issued amount, of other series
of preferred stock ranking equally with and/or junior to the Preferred with
respect to the payment of dividends (whether such dividends are cumulative or
non-cumulative) and/or the distribution of assets upon liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of the Company will not be deemed to adversely
affect the rights, preferences, privileges or voting powers of the Preferred.

If an amendment, alteration, repeal, share exchange, reclassification, merger
or consolidation described above would adversely affect one or more but not
all series of voting preferred stock (including the Preferred for this
purpose), then only the series affected and entitled to vote shall vote as a
class in lieu of all such series of preferred stock.

Without the consent of the holders of the Preferred, so long as such action
does not adversely affect the rights, preferences, privileges and voting
powers of the Preferred, the Company may amend, alter, supplement or repeal
any terms of the Preferred:

to cure any ambiguity, or to cure, correct or supplement any provision
contained in the certificate of designations for the Preferred that may be
defective or inconsistent; or  

to make any provision with respect to matters or questions arising with
respect to the Preferred that is not inconsistent with the provisions of the
certificate of designations.  

The foregoing voting provisions do not apply if, at or prior to the time when
the act with respect to which such vote would otherwise be required shall be
effected, all outstanding shares of the Preferred shall have been redeemed or
called for redemption upon proper notice and sufficient funds shall have been
set aside by the Company for the benefit of the holders of the Preferred to
effect such redemption.

Form

The Preferred are issued only in fully registered form. Other than the
fractional shares currently held by each Trust, no fractional shares will be
issued unless a Trust is dissolved and the Company delivers the shares, rather
than depositary receipts representing the shares, to the registered holders of
its APEX. If a Trust is dissolved and depositary receipts or shares of the
Preferred held by the Trust are distributed to holders of its APEX, the
Company would intend to distribute them in book-entry form only and the
procedures governing holding and transferring beneficial interests in the
Preferred, and the circumstances in which holders of beneficial interests will
be entitled to receive certificates evidencing their shares or depositary
receipts. If the Company determines to issue depositary shares representing
fractional interests in the Preferred, each depositary share will be
represented by a depositary receipt. In such an event, the Preferred
represented by the depositary shares will be deposited under a deposit
agreement among the Company, a depositary and the holders from time to time of
the depositary receipts representing depositary shares. Subject to the terms
and conditions of any deposit agreement, each holder of a depositary share
will be entitled, through the depositary, in proportion to the applicable
fraction of a share of the Preferred represented by such depositary share, to
all the rights applicable fraction of a share of the Preferred represented by
such depositary share, to all the rights and preferences of the Preferred
represented thereby (including dividends, voting, redemption and liquidation
rights).

Title

The Company, the transfer agent and registrar for the Preferred held by a
Trust, and any of their agents may treat the registered owner of the
Preferred, which shall be the Property Trustee unless and until the Trust is
dissolved, as the absolute owner of that stock, whether or not any payment for
the Preferred shall be overdue and despite any notice to the contrary, for any
purpose.

Transfer Agent and Registrar

If a Trust is dissolved and shares of the Preferred held by the Trust or
depositary receipts representing the Preferred are distributed to holders of
APEX, the Company may appoint a transfer agent, registrar, calculation agent,
redemption agent and dividend disbursement agent for the Preferred. The
registrar for the Preferred will send notices to shareholders of any meetings
at which holders of the Preferred have the right to vote on any matter.

DESCRIPTION OF MEDIUM-TERM NOTES, SERIES F, CALLABLE FIXED AND FLOATING
RATE NOTES DUE 2031 OF GS FINANCE CORP. (FULLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY GUARANTEED
BY THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.)

The following is a brief description of the terms of the Callable Fixed and
Floating Rate Notes, an issuance of Medium-Term Notes, Series F of GS Finance
Corp. ("GSFC") (the "Callable Notes"), which are fully and unconditionally
guaranteed by the Company. It does not purport to be complete. This
description is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the
Senior Debt Indenture, dated as of October 10, 2008, among GSFC, as issuer,
the Company, as guarantor, and The Bank of New York Mellon, as trustee, as
supplemented by the First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 20,
2015, the Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 21, 2018 and the
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020 (collectively, the
"GSFC 2008 Indenture"), which are exhibits to the Annual Report of which this
exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise provides, all references to
the Company in this description refer only to The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.
and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

The GSFC 2008 indenture permits GSFC to issue, from time to time, different
series of debt securities and, within each different series of debt
securities, different debt securities. The Medium-Term Notes, Series F are a
single, distinct series of debt securities. GSFC may, however, issue notes in
such amounts, at such times and on such terms as GSFC wishes. The notes of the
Medium-Term Notes, Series F may differ from one another, and from other
series, in their terms.

In this description, references to a series of debt securities mean a series
issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, such as the notes issued under GSFC's
Medium-Term Notes, Series F program.

Terms of the Callable Notes

The Callable Notes were originally issued on March 11, 2021 and have a stated
maturity date of March 11, 2031 (the "stated maturity date"). As noted above,
the Callable Notes are part of a series of debt securities, entitled "Medium-
Term Notes, Series F," that GSFC may issue under the GSFC 2008 Indenture from
time to time. The Callable Notes are listed on the New York Stock Exchange
Bonds Market under the ticker symbol "GS/31B."

The payment of principal of, and any interest and premium on, the Callable
Notes is fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Company. The guarantee
will remain in effect until the entire principal of, and interest and premium,
if any, on, the Callable Notes has been paid in full or discharged in
accordance with the provisions of the GSFC 2008 Indenture, or otherwise fully
defeased by GSFC or by the Company. The guarantee of senior debt securities of
GSFC, such as the Callable Notes, will rank equally in right of payment to all
senior indebtedness of the Company.

Payment of Principal on Stated Maturity Date

GSFC will pay holders of Callable Notes that have not been redeemed by the
stated maturity date an amount in cash equal to the outstanding face amount of
such holders' Callable Notes. The stated maturity date of the Callable Notes
is March 11, 2031, subject to GSFC's early redemption right. If the stated
maturity date falls on a day that is not a business day, payment of principal
otherwise due on such day will be made on the next succeeding business day,
and no interest on such payment shall accrue for the period from and after the
stated maturity date.

Interest Payments

For each fixed rate interest period, the fixed interest rate on the Callable
Notes will equal 5% per annum. For each floating rate interest period, the
floating interest rate on the Callable Notes will be based upon the CMS spread
on the relevant interest determination date for such floating rate interest
period and will be a rate per annum equal to:

if (i) the CMS spread minus 0.25% times (ii) 6.5 is greater than or equal to
the maximum interest rate, the maximum interest rate;  

if (i) the CMS spread minus 0.25% times (ii) 6.5 is less than the maximum
interest rate but greater than the minimum interest rate, (i) the CMS spread
minus 0.25% times (ii) 6.5; or  

if (i) the CMS spread minus 0.25% times (ii) 6.5 is equal to or less than the
minimum interest rate, the minimum interest rate.  

The maximum interest rate on the Callable Notes is 10% per annum. Based on the
formula used to calculate the floating interest rate on the Callable Notes,
holders will not benefit from any increases in the CMS spread minus 0.25%
above approximately 1.54%. The minimum interest rate on the Callable Notes is
0% per annum.

The term "fixed rate interest periods" means the periods from and including a
fixed rate interest payment date (or the original issue date, in the case of
the first fixed rate interest period) to but excluding the next succeeding
fixed rate interest payment date, where the term "fixed rate interest payment
dates" means March 11, June 11, September 11 and December 11 of each year,
commencing on June 11, 2021 and ending on March 11, 2022, subject to
adjustments as described below.

The term "floating rate interest periods" means the periods from and including
a floating rate interest payment date (or the final fixed rate interest
payment date, in the case of the first floating rate interest period) to but
excluding the next succeeding floating rate interest payment date (or the
stated maturity date, in the case of the final floating rate interest period),
where the term "floating rate interest payment dates" means March 11, June 11,
September 11 and December 11 of each year, beginning on June 11, 2022 and
ending on the stated maturity date, subject to adjustments as described below.

The term "interest determination dates" means, for each floating rate interest
period, the second U.S. Government securities business day preceding such
floating rate interest period.

The term "CMS spread" means, on any interest determination date, the 30-year
CMS rate minus the 5-year CMS rate, as described under "- CMS Rate" below.

The calculation agent will calculate the amount of interest payable on each
fixed rate interest payment date and floating rate interest payment date
(each, an "interest payment date") for the applicable fixed rate interest
period and floating rate interest period (each, an "interest period") in the
following manner. For each $1,000 face amount of the Callable Notes and for
each interest period, the calculation agent will calculate the amount of
interest to be paid by calculating the product of (i) the $1,000 face amount
times (ii) the applicable fixed interest rate or floating interest rate times
(iii) the applicable day count convention on a 30/360 (ISDA) basis.

Interest will be paid on the Callable Notes on each quarterly interest payment
date. If an interest payment date (other than the interest payment date that
falls on the stated maturity date) falls on a day that is not a business day,
the payment due on such interest payment date will be postponed to the next
day that is a business day; provided that interest due with respect to such
interest payment date shall not accrue from and including such interest
payment date to and including the date of payment of such interest as so
postponed. If the stated maturity date falls on a day that is not a business
day, payment of interest otherwise due on such day will be made on the next
succeeding business day, and no interest on such payment shall accrue for the
period from and after the stated maturity date.

CMS Rate

References to the 30-year CMS rate or the 5-year CMS rate on an interest
determination date mean the rate appearing on the Refinitiv page ICESWAP1 for
30-year or 5-year index maturity, as the case may be, as of approximately
11:00 A.M., New York City time, on such interest determination date. If a CMS
rate cannot be determined in this manner on the relevant interest
determination date, the following procedures will apply to the Callable Notes.

If the calculation agent determines on an interest determination date that a
CMS rate has been discontinued, then the calculation agent will use a
substitute or successor rate that it has determined in its sole discretion is
most comparable to the applicable CMS rate, provided that if the calculation
agent determines there is an industry-accepted successor rate, then the
calculation agent shall use such successor rate. If the calculation agent has
determined a substitute or successor rate in accordance with the foregoing,
the calculation agent in its sole discretion may determine the business day
convention, the applicable business days and the interest determination dates
to be used, and any other relevant methodology for calculating such substitute
or successor rate, including any adjustment factor needed to make such
substitute or successor rate comparable to the applicable CMS rate, in a
manner that is consistent with any industry-accepted practices for such
substitute or successor rate.

Unless the calculation agent uses a substitute or successor rate as so
provided, if the CMS rate cannot be determined in the manner described above,
the applicable CMS rate for that interest determination date will be
determined by the calculation agent, after consulting such sources as it deems
comparable to the foregoing display page, or any other source it deems
reasonable, in its sole discretion.

The applicable CMS rate will be subject to the corrections, if any, published
on the Refinitiv page ICESWAP1 within one hour of the time that rate was first
displayed on such source.

The term "Refinitiv page ICESWAP1" means the display on the Refinitiv Eikon
service, or any successor or replacement service, on the page ICESWAP1, or any
successor or replacement page on that service.

Manner of Payment

Any payment on the Callable Notes at maturity or upon redemption will be made
to an account designated by the holder of such Callable Notes and approved by
GSFC, or at the office of the trustee in New York City, but only when such
Callable Notes are surrendered to the trustee at that office. GSFC may pay
interest on any interest payment date by check mailed to the person who is the
holder on the regular record date. GSCF also may make any payment in
accordance with the applicable procedures of the depositary.

Modified Business Day

Any payment on the Callable Notes that would otherwise be due on a day that is
not a business day may instead be paid on the next day that is a business day,
with the same effect as if paid on the original due date. For the Callable
Notes, however, the term business day may have a different meaning than it
does for other Series F medium-term notes, as described under "- Special
Calculation Provisions" below.

Role of Calculation Agent

The calculation agent in its sole discretion will make all determinations
regarding the CMS spread, the 30-year CMS rate, the 5-year CMS rate, the
interest determination dates, the regular record dates, the interest payable
on each interest payment date, U.S. Government securities business days,
business days, postponement of the stated maturity date and the amount payable
on the Callable Notes at maturity or redemption, as applicable. Absent
manifest error, all determinations of the calculation agent will be final and
binding on holders of the Callable Notes and GSFC, without any liability on
the part of the calculation agent.

Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC ("GS&Co."), an affiliate of GSFC, is currently serving
as the calculation agent as of the date of this description. GSFC may change
the calculation agent for the Callable Notes at any time after the date of
this prospectus supplement without notice and GS&Co. may resign as calculation
agent at any time upon 60 days' written notice to GSFC.

Early Redemption Right

GSFC may redeem the Callable Notes, at GSFC's option, in whole but not in
part, on the interest payment date falling on March 11, 2022 and on each
interest payment date occurring thereafter, for an amount equal to 100% of the
face amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the
redemption date.

If GSFC chooses to exercise its early redemption right, it will notify the
holder of the Callable Notes and the trustee by giving at least five business
days' prior notice. The day GSFC gives the notice, which will be a business
day, will be the redemption notice date and the immediately following interest
payment date, which GSFC will state in the redemption notice, will be the
redemption date. GSFC will not give a redemption notice that results in a
redemption date later than the stated maturity date.

If GSFC gives the holder a redemption notice, GSFC will redeem the entire
outstanding face amount of such holder's Callable Notes. On the redemption
date, GSFC will pay to the holder of record on the business day immediately
preceding the redemption date, the redemption price in cash, together with any
accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date, in the
manner described under "- Manner of Payment" above.

Special Calculation Provisions

The term "business day" with respect to the Callable Notes means each Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday that is not a day on which banking
institutions in New York City generally are authorized or obligated by law,
regulation or executive order to close.

References to a U.S. Government securities business day with respect to the
Callable Notes mean any day except for a Saturday, Sunday or a day on which
the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association recommends that the
fixed income department of its members be closed for the entire day for
purposes of trading in U.S. government securities.

Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance

The provisions for full defeasance and covenant defeasance in the GSFC 2008
Indenture do not apply to the Callable Notes.

Default, Remedies and Waiver of Default

A holder will have special rights if an event of default with respect to his
or her series of debt securities occurs and is continuing, as described in
this subsection.

Events of Default

References to an event of default with respect to any series of debt
securities mean any of the following:

GSFC or the Company does not pay the principal or any premium on any debt
security of that series within 30 days after the due date;  

GSFC or the Company does not pay interest on any debt security of that series
within 30 days after the due date; or  

GSFC files for bankruptcy or other events of bankruptcy, insolvency or
reorganization relating to GSFC occur. Those events must arise under U.S.
federal or state law, unless GSFC merges, consolidates or sells its assets as
described above and the successor firm is a non-U.S. entity. If that happens,
then those events must arise under U.S. federal or state law or the law of the
jurisdiction in which the successor firm is legally organized.  

As described below under "Remedies If an Event of Default Occurs," under the
GSFC 2008 Indenture, events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization
relating to the Company will not cause any of GSFC's debt securities issued
under such indenture to be automatically accelerated. In the event that the
Company becomes subject to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or
reorganization (but GSFC does not), any series of debt securities issued under
the GSFC 2008 Indenture will not be immediately due and repayable. In
addition, under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, a breach of a covenant or warranty by
the Company (including, for example, a breach of the Company's covenants and
warranties with respect to mergers and similar transactions or restrictions on
liens) will not have the potential to cause any of GSFC's debt securities
issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture to be declared due and payable
immediately. Instead, under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, the trustee or holder
will need to wait until the earlier of the time that (i) GSFC itself becomes
subject to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization or
otherwise defaults on the terms of the debt securities, (ii) the Company
otherwise defaults on the terms of the debt securities and (iii) the final
maturity of the debt securities. The return the holder receives on any series
of debt securities issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture may be significantly
less than what a holder would have otherwise received had the debt securities
been automatically accelerated upon certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency
or reorganization relating to the Company or declared due and payable
immediately following the breach of a covenant or warranty by the Company.

Covenant Breaches

References to a covenant breach with respect to any series of debt securities
mean any of the following:

GSFC or the Company does not deposit a required sinking fund payment with
regard to any debt security of that series on the due date;  

GSFC remains in breach of any other covenant it makes in the GSFC 2008
Indenture for the benefit of the relevant series for 60 days after GSFC and
the Company receive a notice of default stating that GSFC is in breach and
requiring GSFC to remedy the breach. The notice must be sent by the trustee or
the holders of at least 10% in principal amount of the relevant series of debt
securities then outstanding;  

Except as provided by the GSFC 2008 Indenture, the debt security of that
series and the related guarantee, the guarantee ceases to be effective, or a
court finds the guarantee to be unenforceable or invalid, or the Company
denies its obligations as the guarantor.  

A covenant breach shall not be an event of default with respect to any
security.

Remedies If an Event of Default or Covenant Breach Occurs

If an event of default has occurred with respect to any series of debt
securities and has not been cured or waived, the trustee or the holders of not
less than 25% in principal amount of all debt securities of that series then
outstanding may declare the entire principal amount of the debt securities of
that series to be due immediately. If the event of default occurs because of
events in bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization relating to GSFC, the
entire principal amount of the debt securities of that series will be
automatically accelerated, without any action by the trustee or any holder.

Each of the situations described above is called an acceleration of the stated
maturity of the affected series of debt securities. If the stated maturity of
any series is accelerated and a judgment for payment has not yet been
obtained, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the debt securities
of that series may cancel the acceleration for the entire series.

If an event of default or a covenant breach occurs, the trustee will have
special duties. In that situation, the trustee will be obligated to use those
of its rights and powers under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, and to use the same
degree of care and skill in doing so, that a prudent person would use in that
situation in conducting his or her own affairs.

Except as described in the prior paragraph, the trustee is not required to
take any action under the GSFC 2008 Indenture at the request of any holders
unless the holders offer the trustee reasonable protection from expenses and
liability ( i.e., an indemnity). If the trustee is provided with an
indemnity reasonably satisfactory to it, the holders of a majority in
principal amount of all debt securities of the relevant series may direct the
time, method and place of conducting any lawsuit or other formal legal action
seeking any remedy available to the trustee with respect to that series. These
majority holders may also direct the trustee in performing any other action
under the GSFC 2008 Indenture with respect to the debt securities of that
series.

Before a holder bypasses the trustee and bring its own lawsuit or other formal
legal action or take other steps to enforce its rights or protect its
interests relating to any debt security, all of the following must occur:

The holder must give the trustee written notice that an event of default or a
covenant breach has occurred, and the event of default or covenant breach must
not have been cured or waived;  

The holders of not less than 25% in principal amount of all debt securities of
a holder's series must make a written request that the trustee take action
because of the default, and they or other holders must offer to the trustee
indemnity reasonably satisfactory to the trustee against the cost and other
liabilities of taking that action;  

The trustee must not have taken action for 60 days after the above steps have
been taken; and  

During those 60 days, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the
debt securities of a holder's series must not have given the trustee
directions that are inconsistent with the written request of the holders of
not less than 25% in principal amount of the debt securities of a holder's
series.  

A holder is entitled at any time, however, to bring a lawsuit for the payment
of money due on his or her debt security on or after its stated maturity (or,
if the debt security is redeemable, on or after its redemption date).

Waiver of Default

The holders of not less than a majority in principal amount of the debt
securities of any series may waive a default for all debt securities of that
series. If this happens, the default will be treated as if it has not
occurred. No one can waive a payment default on a holder's debt security,
however, without the approval of the particular holder of that debt security.

GSFC and the Company Will Give the Trustee Information About Defaults
Annually

GSFC and the Company will furnish to the trustee every year a written
statement, respectively, of two of their officers certifying that to their
knowledge GSFC or the Company, as the case may be, is in compliance with the
GSFC 2008 Indenture and the debt securities issued under it, or else
specifying any default under the relevant debt indenture. For the purpose of
this paragraph, the term "default" means any event which is, or after notice
or lapse of time or both would become, an event of default or covenant breach.

Default Amount on Acceleration

If an event of default occurs and the maturity of the Callable Notes is
accelerated, GSFC will pay the default amount in respect of the principal of
the Callable Notes at the maturity, instead of the amount payable on the
Callable Notes as described earlier.

For the purpose of determining whether the holders of GSFC's Medium-Term Notes
Series F, which include the Callable Notes, are entitled to take any action
under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, GSFC will treat the outstanding face amount of
each Callable Note as the outstanding principal amount of that note. Although
the terms of the Callable Notes differ from those of the other Medium-Term
Notes Series F, holders of specified percentages in principal amount of all
Medium-Term Notes Series F, together in some cases with other series of GSFC's
debt securities, will be able to take action affecting all the Medium-Term
Notes Series F, including the Callable Notes, except with respect to certain
Medium-Term Notes Series F, if the terms of such notes specify that the
holders of specified percentages in the principal amount of all such notes
must also consent to such action. This action may involve changing some of the
terms that apply to the Medium-Term Notes Series F, accelerating the maturity
of the Medium-Term Notes Series F, after a default or waiving some of GSFC's
obligations under the GSFC 2008 Indenture. In addition, certain changes to the
GSFC 2008 Indenture and the Callable Notes that only affect certain debt
securities may be made with the approval of holders of a majority of the
principal amount of such affected debt securities.

Guarantee by the Company

The Company has fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment of principal
of, and any interest and premium on, the Medium-Term Notes, Series F, which
include the Callable Notes, when due and payable, whether at the stated
maturity, by declaration of acceleration, call for redemption or otherwise, in
accordance with the terms of the security and the GSFC 2008 Indenture. The
guarantee will remain in effect until the entire principal of, and interest
and premium, if any, on, the debt securities has been paid in full or
discharged in accordance with the provisions of the GSFC 2008 Indenture, or
otherwise fully defeased by the Company.

The guarantee by the Company of its debt securities issued under the GSFC 2008
Indenture will rank equally in right of payment with all senior indebtedness
of the Company.

Mergers and Similar Transactions

GSFC and the Company are generally permitted to merge or consolidate with
another corporation or other entity. GSFC and the Company also permitted to
sell their assets substantially as an entirety to another corporation or other
entity. With regard to any series of debt securities, however, GSFC or the
Company may not take any of these actions unless all the following conditions
are met:

If the successor entity in the transaction is not GSFC or the Company, as the
case may be, the successor entity must be organized as a corporation,
partnership or trust and must expressly assume the obligations of GSFC or the
Company under the debt securities of that series and the GSFC 2008 Indenture
with respect to that series. The successor entity may be organized under the
laws of any jurisdiction, whether in the United States or elsewhere.  

Immediately after the transaction, no default under the debt securities of
that series or the related guarantees has occurred and is continuing. For this
purpose, "default under the debt securities of that series or the related
guarantees" means an event of default or a covenant breach with respect to
that series or the related guarantees or any event that would be an event of
default with respect to that series or the related guarantees if the
requirements for giving GSFC or the Company default notice and for GSFC's or
the Company's default having to continue for a specific period of time were
disregarded.  

If the conditions described above are satisfied with respect to debt
securities of any series, neither GSFC nor the Company will need to obtain the
approval of the holders of those debt securities in order to merge or
consolidate or to sell assets of GSFC or the Company. Also, these conditions
will apply only if GSFC or the Company wishes to merge or consolidate with
another entity or sell assets of GSFC or the Company substantially as an
entirety to another entity. Neither GSFC nor the Company will need to satisfy
these conditions if GSFC or the Company enters into other types of
transactions, including any transaction in which GSFC or the Company acquire
the stock or assets of another entity, any transaction that involves a change
of control of GSFC or the Company but in which GSFC or the Company does not
merge or consolidate and any transaction in which GSFC or the Company sells
less than substantially all assets of GSFC or the Company. While GSFC is
currently a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, there is no requirement
that it remain a subsidiary.

Also, if GSFC or the Company merges, consolidates or sells assets of GSFC or
the Company substantially as an entirety and the successor is a non-U.S.
entity, neither GSFC nor any successor would have any obligation to compensate
a holder for any resulting adverse tax consequences relating to his or her
debt securities.

Notwithstanding the foregoing and for the avoidance of doubt, GSFC may sell or
transfer its assets substantially as an entirety, in one or more transactions,
to one or more entities, provided that GSFC's assets and the assets of its
direct or indirect subsidiaries in which it owns a majority of the combined
voting power, taken together, are not sold or transferred substantially as an
entirety to one or more entities that are not majority-owned subsidiaries of
the Company, and the Company. may sell or transfer its assets substantially as
an entirety in one or more transactions, to one or more entities, provided
that the assets of the Company and its direct or indirect subsidiaries in
which it owns a majority of the combined voting power, taken together, are not
sold or transferred substantially as an entirety to one or more entities that
are not such subsidiaries.

Restriction on Liens

In the GSFC 2008 Indenture, the Company promises, with respect to each series
of senior debt securities, not to create, assume, incur or guarantee any debt
for borrowed money that is secured by a lien on the voting or profit
participating equity ownership interests that the Company or any of its
subsidiaries own in Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or in any subsidiary of the
Company that beneficially owns or holds, directly or indirectly, those
interests in Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, unless the Company also secures the
senior debt securities of that series on an equal or priority basis with the
other secured debt. The promise of the Company, however, is subject to an
important exception: it may secure debt for borrowed money with liens on those
interests without securing the senior debt securities of any series if its
board of directors determines that the liens do not materially detract from or
interfere with the value or control of those interests, as of the date of the
determination.

Except as noted above, the GSFC 2008 Indenture does not restrict the Company's
ability to put liens on its interests in its subsidiaries other than Goldman
Sachs & Co. LLC, nor does the indenture restrict the Company's ability to sell
or otherwise dispose of its interests in any of its subsidiaries, including
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC. In addition, the restriction on liens in the GSFC
2008 Indenture applies only to liens that secure debt for borrowed money. For
example, liens imposed by operation of law, such as liens to secure statutory
obligations for taxes or workers' compensation benefits, or liens the Company
creates to secure obligations to pay legal judgments or surety bonds, would
not be covered by this restriction.

Modification of the Debt Indenture and Waiver of Covenants

There are four types of changes GSFC and the Company can make to the GSFC 2008
Indenture and the debt securities or series of debt securities and related
guarantees issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture.

Changes Requiring Each Holder's Approval

First, there are changes that cannot be made without the approval of the
holder of each debt security affected by the change under the GSFC 2008
Indenture. Here is a list of those types of changes:

change the stated maturity for any principal or interest payment on a debt
security;  

reduce the principal amount, the amount payable on acceleration of the stated
maturity after a default, the interest rate or the redemption price for a debt
security;  

permit redemption of a debt security if not previously permitted;  

impair any right a holder may have to require repayment of its debt security;  

change the currency of any payment on a debt security;  

change the place of payment on a debt security;  

impair a holder's right to sue for payment of any amount due on its debt
security;  

reduce the percentage in principal amount of the debt securities of any one or
more affected series, taken  

separately or together, as applicable, and whether comprising the same or
different series or less than all of the debt securities of a series, the
approval of whose holders is needed to change the applicable debt indenture or
those debt securities;  

reduce the percentage in principal amount of the debt securities of any one or
more affected series, taken separately or together, as applicable, and whether
comprising the same or different series or less than all of the debt
securities of a series, the consent of whose holders is needed to waive GSFC's
compliance with the applicable debt indenture or to waive defaults; and  

change the provisions of the applicable debt indenture dealing with
modification and waiver in any other respect, except to increase any required
percentage referred to above or to add to the provisions that cannot be
changed or waived without approval of the holder of each affected debt
security.  

Changes Not Requiring Approval

The second type of change does not require any approval by holders of the debt
securities affected. These changes are limited to clarifications and changes
that would not adversely affect any debt securities of any series in any
material respect. Neither GSFC nor the Company needs any approval to make
changes that affect only debt securities to be issued under the applicable
indenture after the changes take effect.

GSFC and the Company may also make changes or obtain waivers that do not
adversely affect a particular debt security, even if they affect other debt
securities. In those cases, neither GSFC nor the Company needs to obtain the
approval of the holder of the unaffected debt security; GSFC and the Company
need only obtain any required approvals from the holders of the affected debt
securities.

Changes Requiring Majority Approval

Any other change to the GSFC 2008 Indenture and the debt securities issued
under such debt indenture would require the following approval:

If the change affects only particular debt securities within a series, it must
be approved by the holders of a majority in principal amount of such
particular debt securities.  

If the change affects multiple debt securities of one or more series, it must
be approved by the holders of a majority in principal amount of all debt
securities affected by the change, with all such affected debt securities
voting together as one class for this purpose (and by the holders of a
majority in principal amount of any affected debt securities that by their
terms are entitled to vote separately).  

In each case, the required approval must be given by written consent.

This would mean that modification of terms with respect to certain debt
securities of a series could be effectuated under the GSFC 2008 Indenture
without obtaining the consent of the holders of a majority in principal amount
of other securities of such series that are not affected by such modification.

The same majority approval would be required for GSFC to obtain a waiver of
any of its covenants in the GSFC 2008 Indenture. GSFC's covenants include the
promises GSFC and the Company make about merging and, with respect to the
Company, putting liens on GSFC's interests in Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC. If the
holders approve a waiver of a covenant, neither GSFC nor the Company will have
to comply with it. The holders, however, cannot approve a waiver of any
provision in a particular debt security, or in the GSFC 2008 Indenture as it
affects that debt security, that neither GSFC nor the Company can change
without the approval of the holder of that debt security as described above in
"- Changes Requiring Each Holder's Approval," unless that holder approves the
waiver.

Special Rules for Action by Holders

When holders take any action under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, such as giving a
notice of default, notice of covenant breach, declaring an acceleration,
approving any change or waiver or giving the trustee an instruction, GSFC will
apply the following rules.

Only Outstanding Debt Securities Are Eligible

Only holders of outstanding debt securities or the outstanding debt securities
of the applicable series, as applicable, will be eligible to participate in
any action by holders of such debt securities or the debt securities of that
series. Also, GSFC will count only outstanding debt securities in determining
whether the various percentage requirements for taking action have been met.
For these purposes, a debt security will not be "outstanding" if:

it has been surrendered for cancellation;  

GSFC has deposited or set aside, in trust for its holder, money for its
payment or redemption;  

GSFC has fully defeased it; or  

GSFC or one of its affiliates, such as Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, is the owner.  

Determining Record Dates for Action by Holders

GSFC and the Company will generally be entitled to set any day as a record
date for the purpose of determining the holders that are entitled to take
action under a particular debt indenture. In certain limited circumstances,
only the trustee will be entitled to set a record date for action by holders.
If GSFC, the Company or the trustee set a record date for an approval or other
action to be taken by holders, that vote or action may be taken only by
persons or entities who are holders on the record date and must be taken
during the period that GSFC specifies for this purpose, or that the trustee
specifies if it sets the record date. GSFC, the Company or the trustee, as
applicable, may shorten or lengthen this period from time to time.

This period, however, may not extend beyond the 180th day after the record
date for the action. In addition, record dates for any global debt security
may be set in accordance with procedures established by the depositary from
time to time. Accordingly, record dates for global debt securities may differ
from those for other debt securities.

Form of Callable Notes

The Callable Notes are issued in book-entry form through The Depository Trust
Company and represented by a global note. GSFC will not issue definitive notes
in exchange for the global note except in limited circumstances.

DESCRIPTION OF MEDIUM-TERM NOTES, SERIES E, INDEX-LINKED NOTES DUE 2028 OF
GS FINANCE CORP. (FULLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY GUARANTEED BY THE GOLDMAN SACHS
GROUP, INC.) 2 

The following is a brief description of the terms of the Large Cap Growth
Index-Linked ETNs, an issuance of Medium-Term Notes, Series E of GS Finance
Corp. ("GSFC") (the "Index Linked Notes"), which are fully and unconditionally
guaranteed by the Company. It does not purport to be complete. This
description is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the
Senior Debt Indenture, dated as of October 10, 2008, among GSFC, as issuer,
the Company, as guarantor, and The Bank of New York Mellon, as trustee, as
supplemented by the First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 20,
2015 (collectively, the "GSFC 2008 Indenture"), which are exhibits to the
Annual Report of which this exhibit is a part. Unless the context otherwise
provides, all references to the Company in this description refer only to The
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. and does not include its consolidated subsidiaries.

The GSFC 2008 indenture permits GSFC to issue, from time to time, different
series of debt securities and, within each different series of debt
securities, different debt securities. The Medium-Term Notes, Series E are a
single, distinct series of debt securities. GSFC may, however, issue notes in
such amounts, at such times and on such terms as GSFC wishes. The notes of the
Medium-Term Notes, Series E may differ from one another, and from other
series, in their terms.

In this description, references to a series of debt securities mean a series
issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, such as the notes issued under GSFC's
Medium-Term Notes, Series E program.

Terms of the Index-Linked Notes

As noted above, the Index-Linked Notes are part of a series of debt
securities, entitled "Medium-Term Notes, Series E," that GSFC may issue under
the GSFC 2008 Indenture from time to time. The Index-Linked Notes were, until
redemption on February 15, 2022, listed on the New York Stock Exchange Arca
under the ticker symbol "FRLG."

The payment of principal of, and any interest and premium on, the Index-Linked
Notes is fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Company. The guarantee
will remain in effect until the entire principal of, and interest and premium,
if any, on, the Index-Linked Notes has been paid in full or discharged in
accordance with the provisions of the GSFC 2008 Indenture, or otherwise fully
defeased by GSFC or by the Company. The guarantee of senior debt securities of
GSFC, such as the Index-Linked Notes, will rank equally in right of payment to
all senior indebtedness of the Company.

The Index-Linked Notes do not bear interest. The amount that will be paid on
the Index-Linked Notes at stated maturity (April 3, 2028) or redemption (which
could be postponed up to 30 calendar days if a market disruption event occurs)
is based on the leveraged performance of the Russell 1000® Growth Total Return
Index, less significant applicable fees.

The Index-Linked Notes had two times leverage on the inception date (March 29,
2018) and are rebalanced to approximately two times leverage both quarterly
and in the event of a decline in the index level of 20% or more since the
prior rebalancing date. As a result, the actual leverage may be greater or
less than two times between rebalancing dates (which could be postponed up to
5 trading days if a market disruption event occurs, potentially causing
leverage to significantly exceed two).

Amount payable on the notes:

The Index-Linked Notes do not bear interest.

At maturity:

if the Index-Linked Notes have not been previously redeemed, on the stated
maturity date GSFC will pay such holder, for each $100 face amount of his or
her Index-Linked Notes, an amount in cash equal to (i) the closing indicative
note value on the final valuation date minus (ii) the settlement fee on the
final valuation date  

Upon redemption at the option of the holder:

if the holder elects to have GSFC redeem at least $500,000 face amount of his
or her Index-Linked Notes, on the applicable redemption date GSFC will pay
such holder, for each $100 face amount of his or her Index-Linked Notes so
redeemed, an amount in cash equal to (i) the closing indicative note value on
the applicable redemption valuation date minus (ii) the settlement fee on such
redemption valuation date  

Upon redemption at the option of the issuer:

if GSFC redeems a holder's notes at its option, on the applicable redemption
date GSFC will pay such holder, for each $100 face amount of such holder's
notes, an amount in cash equal to the closing indicative note value on the
applicable redemption valuation date  

Upon automatic redemption:

if a holder's notes are automatically redeemed, on the applicable redemption
date GSFC will pay such holder, for each $100 face amount of his or her Index-
Linked Notes, an amount in cash equal to the automatic redemption note value  

Closing indicative note value:

on the initial valuation date, $100; or  

on any valuation date other than the initial valuation date, (i) the asset
position on such valuation date minus (ii) the financing level on such
valuation date, subject to a minimum of $0  

The closing indicative note value is intended to approximate the intrinsic
economic value of the Index-Linked Notes at a particular point in time and
will fluctuate over time based on the changes in the closing level of the
index, subject to applicable fees  .

The closing indicative note value is expected to be published on each
valuation date, so long as no market disruption event has occurred or is
continuing, under the Bloomberg symbol "FRLGIV Index."

Intraday indicative note value: at any given time on any valuation date
after the initial valuation date, before the closing indicative note value for
such day is published, (i) the intraday asset position at such time on the
current valuation date minus (ii) the financing level on the immediately
preceding valuation date minus (iii) the daily investor fee on the current
valuation date, subject to a minimum of $0.

The intraday indicative note value is intended to approximate the intrinsic
economic value of the Index-Linked Notes during the trading day and will
fluctuate within a trading day based on changes in the intraday level of the
index, subject to applicable fees.

The intraday indicative note value is expected to be published every 15
seconds on each valuation day during the hours on which trading is generally
conducted on NYSE Arca, so long as no market disruption event has occurred or
is continuing. The intraday indicative note value is expected to be published
under the Bloomberg symbol "FRLGIV Index."

Asset position:

on the initial valuation date, $200, which is equal to the initial leverage
factor times the face amount per note; or  

on any valuation date other than the initial valuation date, the sum of (i)
the product of (a) the asset position on the immediately preceding valuation
date times (b) the index performance factor on the current valuation date plus
(ii) the rebalancing amount (if any) on the current valuation date  

The asset position represents a hypothetical leveraged investment in the index
and reflects the exposure to the index. The value of the asset position will
increase or decrease depending on the performance of the index and, on each
rebalancing date, will further increase or decrease to reflect changes to the
exposure to the index due to the rebalancing adjustment. The asset position is
expected to be published on each valuation date, so long as no market
disruption event has occurred or is continuing, under the Bloomberg symbol
"FRLGAP Index."

Intraday asset position: at any given time on any valuation date after the
initial valuation date, the product of (i) the asset position on the
immediately preceding valuation date times (ii) the intraday index
performance factor.

Settlement fee: the settlement fee is a fee imposed upon redemption at the
option of the holder and payment on the stated maturity date and is equal to
the product of 0.06% times the asset position on the applicable redemption
valuation date or the final valuation date, as applicable.

The settlement fee is assessed to account for the brokerage and transaction
costs in unwinding any hedge the issuer may have relating to the Index-Linked
Notes.

Index performance factor:

on the initial valuation date, 1; or  

on any valuation date other than the initial valuation date, the quotient of
(i) the closing level of the index on the current valuation date divided by
(ii) the closing level of the index on the immediately preceding valuation
date  

Intraday index performance factor: at any given time on any valuation date
after the initial valuation date, the quotient of (i) the applicable
intraday level of the index at such time divided by (ii) the closing level
of the index on the immediately preceding valuation date

Initial leverage factor : 2

Leverage factor : on any valuation date, the quotient of (i) the asset
position on such valuation date divided by (ii) the closing indicative note
value on such valuation date

The leverage factor reflects the leveraged exposure to the index and will
reset to approximately 2 on each rebalancing date.

Financing level:

on the initial valuation date, $100; or  

on any valuation date other than the initial valuation date, the sum of (i)
the financing level on the immediately preceding valuation date plus (ii) the
daily investor fee on the current valuation date plus (iii) the rebalancing
fee (if any) on the current valuation date plus (iv) the rebalancing amount
(if any) on the current valuation date.  

The financing level represents a hypothetical loan and the accrual of the
daily investor fee and the rebalancing fee (on each rebalancing date). On each
rebalancing date, the financing level will increase due to the rebalancing fee
and will increase or decrease to reflect changes in the hypothetical loan
associated with the rebalanced exposure to the index. The daily investor fee
is intended to compensate the issuer for providing investors leveraged
participation in the index, including financing fees that investors may have
otherwise incurred had they sought to borrow funds at a similar rate from a
third party to invest in the index. The financing level is expected to be
published on each valuation date, so long as no market disruption event has
occurred or is continuing, under the Bloomberg symbol "FRLGFL Index."

Daily investor fee:

on the initial valuation date, $0; or  

on any valuation date other than the initial valuation date, the product of
(i) the sum of (a) the product of (1) the financing level on the
immediately preceding rebalancing date (or if none, the inception date)
times (2) the financing fee rate plus (b) the product of (1) 0.65% per
annum times (2) 50% times (3) the asset position on the immediately
preceding valuation date times (ii) the quotient of (a) the number of
calendar days from, but excluding, the immediately preceding valuation date
to, and including, the current valuation date divided by (b) 360. In no case
will the daily investor fee be negative.  

The daily investor fee is assessed daily and is intended to compensate the
issuer for providing investors leveraged participation in the index, including
financing fees that investors may have otherwise incurred had they sought to
borrow funds at a similar rate from a third party to invest in the index.

Financing fee rate:

on any valuation date prior to and including the first quarterly rebalancing
date, 3.12175%; or  

on any valuation date after the first quarterly rebalancing date, the sum of
(i) 0.81% per annum plus (ii) 3-month USD LIBOR calculated on the
immediately preceding quarterly rebalancing date.  

The financing fee rate is intended to represent a rate for a financing fee
that investors may have otherwise incurred had they sought to borrow funds at
a similar rate from a third party to invest in the index.

3-month USD LIBOR: on any day, the 3-month London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) for deposits in U.S. dollars as it appears on Reuters screen LIBOR01
page (or any successor or replacement service or page thereof) at 11:00 a.m.,
London time on such day (or, if such day is not a London business day, the
immediately preceding London business day), subject to adjustment as described
below.

Discontinuance of 3-month USD LIBOR: if the calculation agent determines,
on a day on which 3-month USD LIBOR is scheduled to be determined under the
terms of the Index-Linked Notes, that 3-month USD LIBOR has been discontinued,
then the calculation agent will use a substitute or successor rate that it has
determined in its sole discretion is most comparable to the 3-month USD LIBOR
rate, provided that if the calculation agent determines there is an
industry-accepted successor rate, then the calculation agent shall use such
successor rate. If the calculation agent has determined a substitute or
successor rate in accordance with the foregoing, the calculation agent in its
sole discretion may determine the definition of business day and the valuation
dates to be used, and any other relevant methodology for calculating such
substitute or successor rate, including any adjustment factor needed to make
such substitute or successor rate comparable to the 3-month USD LIBOR rate, in
a manner that is consistent with industry-accepted practices for such
substitute or successor rate.

Unless the calculation agent uses a substitute or successor rate as so
provided, if the 3-month USD LIBOR rate cannot be determined in the manner
described above, then:

If 3-month USD LIBOR does not appear on the Reuters screen LIBOR page on any
day, then the calculation agent will determine 3-month USD LIBOR on the basis
of the rates at which deposits in U.S. dollars are offered by four major banks
in the London interbank market at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, on
such London business day to prime banks in the London interbank market for a
period of three months commencing in two London business days and in a
representative amount. The calculation agent will request the principal London
office of each of the four major banks in the London interbank market to
provide a quotation of its rate. If at least two such quotations are provided,
3-month USD LIBOR for such London business day will be the arithmetic mean of
the quotations.  

If fewer than two quotations are provided as requested, 3-month USD LIBOR for
such London business day will be the arithmetic mean of the rates quoted by
major banks in New York City, selected by the calculation agent, at
approximately 11:00 a.m., New York City time, on such London business day for
loans in U.S. dollars to leading European banks for a period of three months
commencing in two London business days and in a representative amount.  

If no quotation is provided, then the calculation agent, after consulting such
sources as it deems comparable to any of the foregoing quotations or display
page, or any such source as it deems reasonable from which to estimate 3-month
USD LIBOR or any of the foregoing lending rates, shall determine 3-month USD
LIBOR for the applicable day in its sole discretion.  

For the purposes of the previous paragraph, "representative amount" means an
amount that is representative for a single transaction in the relevant market
at the relevant time.

Closing level of the index: as described below under "- Special
Calculation Provisions - Closing Level of the Index"

Intraday level of the index: as described below under "- Special
Calculation Provisions - Intraday Level of the Index"

Inception date: March 29, 2018

Initial valuation date: the inception date

Final valuation date : March 29, 2028, unless the calculation agent
determines that a market disruption event occurs or is continuing on that day
or that day is not otherwise a trading day. In that event, the final valuation
date will be the first following trading day on which the calculation agent
determines that a market disruption event does not occur and is not
continuing. In no event, however, will the final valuation date be postponed
by more than thirty calendar days. If the final valuation date is postponed to
the last possible day, but a market disruption event occurs or is continuing
on that day or that day is not a trading day, that day will nevertheless be
the final valuation date.

Valuation dates: each trading day during the period commencing on the
initial valuation date and ending on the final valuation date. Notwithstanding
the immediately preceding sentence, if the calculation agent determines that a
market disruption event occurs or is continuing on a redemption valuation
date, the automatic redemption valuation date, a loss rebalancing date, a
quarterly rebalancing date or the final valuation date, such redemption
valuation date, automatic redemption valuation date, loss rebalancing date,
quarterly rebalancing date or final valuation date, as applicable, will be
postponed for the purpose of the redemption, rebalancing or maturity
valuation, as applicable, as described herein.

Stated maturity date: April 3, 2028, unless that day is not a business
day, in which case the stated maturity date will be postponed to the next
following business day. If the final valuation date is postponed as described
under "- Final Valuation Date" above, the stated maturity date will be
postponed by the same number of business day(s) from but excluding the
originally scheduled final valuation date to and including the actual final
valuation date.

Redemption (three types: at the option of the holder; at the option of the
issuer; and automatic):

Redemption at the option of the holder:

A holder may elect to have GSFC redeem his or her Index-Linked Notes prior to
the stated maturity date, in whole or in part, provided that in each case
such holder redeems at least $500,000 face amount of notes.

Redemption at the option of the issuer:

GSFC may redeem the Index-Linked Notes at its option prior to the stated
maturity date, in whole but not in part.

Automatic redemption:

GSFC will automatically redeem the Index-Linked Notes, in whole but not in
part, if, at any time on any valuation date prior to the final valuation date,
the intraday level of the index is equal to or less than 70% of the closing
level of the index on the immediately preceding rebalancing date (or if none,
the inception date).

Redemption valuation date (with respect to redemption at the option of the
holder): the first valuation date following the date on which the holder
delivers notice to GSFC in compliance with the applicable procedures.
Notwithstanding the immediately preceding sentence, if a market disruption
event occurs or is continuing on a redemption valuation date (with respect to
redemption at the option of the holder), such redemption valuation date will
be the first following trading day on which the calculation agent determines
that a market disruption event does not occur and is not continuing. In no
event, however, will a redemption valuation date be postponed by more than 30
calendar days. If such redemption valuation date is postponed to the last
possible day, but a market disruption event occurs or is continuing on that
day or that day is not a trading day, that day will nevertheless be the
redemption valuation date.

Redemption date (with respect to redemption at the option of the holder):
the third business day following the applicable redemption valuation date

Redemption valuation date (with respect to redemption at the option of the
issuer): the tenth valuation date following the date on which GSFC provides
notice to holders of the Index-Linked Notes and the trustee. Notwithstanding
the immediately preceding sentence, if a market disruption event occurs or is
continuing on a redemption valuation date (with respect to redemption at the
option of the issuer), such redemption valuation date will be the first
following trading day on which the calculation agent determines that a market
disruption event does not occur and is not continuing. In no event, however,
will a redemption valuation date be postponed by more than 30 calendar days.
If such redemption valuation date is postponed to the last possible day, but a
market disruption event occurs or is continuing on that day or that day is not
a trading day, that day will nevertheless be the redemption valuation date.

Redemption date (with respect to redemption at the option of the issuer):
the third business day following the applicable redemption valuation date

Redemption date (with respect to automatic redemption): the fifth business
day following the automatic redemption valuation date

Automatic redemption event: GSFC will automatically redeem the Index-
Linked Notes, in whole but not in part, if, at any time on any valuation date
prior to the final valuation date, the intraday level of the index is equal to
or less than the automatic redemption trigger

If an automatic redemption event occurs on a rebalancing date, the Index-
Linked Notes will be automatically redeemed pursuant to the automatic
redemption event without giving regard to the rebalancing adjustment. If GSFC
provides notice of an issuer redemption of the Index-Linked Notes and then an
automatic redemption event occurs on or prior to the applicable redemption
valuation date, the notice of issuer redemption will be superseded and the
Index-Linked Notes will be automatically redeemed on the relevant redemption
date at an amount equal to the automatic redemption note value. Additionally,
if a holder provides notice of a holder redemption but an automatic redemption
event occurs on or prior to the applicable redemption valuation date, such
notice of holder redemption will be superseded and the Index-Linked Notes will
be automatically redeemed on the redemption date (for the automatic
redemption) at an amount equal to the automatic redemption note value.

Automatic redemption event date: the valuation date on which the automatic
redemption event occurs

Automatic redemption valuation date: the automatic redemption event date,
provided that if (i) a market disruption event occurs after the occurrence
of the automatic redemption event but before the determination of the
automatic redemption note value and (ii) such market disruption event is
continuing at 3:30 p.m., New York City time, on the automatic redemption event
date, the automatic redemption valuation date will be the first following
valuation date on which the calculation agent determines that a market
disruption event does not occur and is not continuing. In no event, however,
will the automatic redemption valuation date be postponed by more than 30
calendar days. If the automatic redemption valuation date is postponed to the
last possible day, but a market disruption event occurs or is continuing on
that day, that day will nevertheless be the automatic redemption valuation
date.

Automatic redemption trigger: at any time on any valuation date, 70% of
the closing level of the index on the immediately preceding rebalancing date
(or if none, the inception date). The automatic redemption trigger is expected
to be published on each valuation date, so long as no market disruption event
has occurred or is continuing, under the Bloomberg symbol "FRLGAT Index."

Automatic redemption note value: upon the occurrence of an automatic
redemption event, the result of (i) the product of (a) the asset position
on the valuation date immediately preceding the automatic redemption event
date times (b) the automatic redemption index performance factor minus
(ii) the financing level on the automatic redemption event date, subject to a
minimum of $0

Automatic redemption index performance factor:

if an automatic redemption event occurs prior to 2:30 p.m., New York City
time, or at or after 3:30 p.m., New York City time, on the automatic
redemption event date, the quotient of (i) the index VWAP level divided by
(ii) the closing level of the index on the valuation date immediately
preceding the automatic redemption event date; or  

if an automatic redemption event occurs at or after 2:30 p.m., New York City
time, but prior to 3:30 p.m., New York City time, on the automatic redemption
event date, the quotient of (i) the closing level of the index on the
automatic redemption event date divided by (ii) the closing level of the
index on the valuation date immediately preceding the automatic redemption
event date  

Index VWAP level: on any applicable valuation date, the sum of the
products , as calculated for each index stock, of (i) the VWAP of such index
stock times (ii) the quotient of (a) the available float shares of such
index stock on such valuation date divided by (b) the index divisor on such
valuation date.

The index VWAP level is intended to replicate the proceeds realized from a
sale of the index stocks in the quantities that they comprise the index
gradually over the relevant VWAP period.

Volume-weighted average price (VWAP): with respect to each index stock, on
any applicable valuation date, the sum of the quotients , calculated for
each transaction on such index stock on the primary exchange during the
applicable VWAP period, of (i) the product of (a) the gross price at which
such transaction is executed times (b) the relevant number of shares of the
index stock referenced in such transaction divided by (ii) the total number
of shares of the index stock traded on the primary exchange during such VWAP
period.

Notwithstanding the above, in the event of a suspension of or limitation of
trading in an index stock on its respective primary market during a part or
all of the VWAP period where such suspension or limitation does not trigger a
market disruption event (such suspension or limitation, an "index stock
disruption"), the VWAP will be calculated during the portion of the VWAP
period during which there is no such index stock disruption; provided that
if the index stock disruption continues for the entire VWAP period, the
calculation agent will determine the VWAP for such index stock in its sole
discretion and in a commercially reasonable manner.

VWAP period:

if an automatic redemption event occurs prior to 2:30 p.m., New York City
time, on the automatic redemption event date, the one-hour period starting 30
minutes after the automatic redemption event occurs; or  

if an automatic redemption event occurs at or after 3:30 p.m., New York City
time, on the automatic redemption event date, the one-hour period starting at
10:00 a.m., New York City time, on the valuation date immediately following
such automatic redemption event date.  

Available float shares: with respect to each index stock, on any
applicable valuation date, the result , as published by the index sponsor,
of (i) total shares of such index stock outstanding minus (ii) the shares of
such index stock held by control holders

Index divisor: on any applicable valuation date, a value calculated and
published by the index sponsor that is intended to maintain conformity in
index values over time

Primary exchange: for each index stock, the exchange on which such index
stock has its primary listing, as determined by the calculation agent

Rebalancing: rebalancing can occur on a quarterly rebalancing date or
because of a loss rebalancing event

Loss rebalancing event: if, on any valuation date that is not a
rebalancing date, the closing level of the index is equal to or less than the
loss rebalancing trigger, a loss rebalancing event is deemed to have occurred
on such valuation date. A loss rebalancing event will result in the Index-
Linked Notes being rebalanced on the loss rebalancing date and will have the
effect of deleveraging the Index-Linked Notes with the aim of resetting the
then-current leverage factor back to approximately 2. This means that after
the applicable loss rebalancing date, a constant percentage increase in the
closing level of the index will have less of a positive effect on the value of
the Index-Linked Notes relative to before such loss rebalancing date

Loss rebalancing trigger: on any valuation date, 80% of the closing level
of the index on the immediately preceding rebalancing date (or if none, the
initial valuation date). The loss rebalancing trigger is expected to be
published on each valuation date, so long as no market disruption event has
occurred or is continuing, under the Bloomberg symbol "FRLGRT Index."

Loss rebalancing date: the first valuation date immediately following any
valuation date on which a loss rebalancing event occurs, unless the
calculation agent determines that a market disruption event occurs or is
continuing on that day or that day is not otherwise a trading day. In that
event, the loss rebalancing date will be the first following trading day on
which the calculation agent determines that a market disruption event does not
occur and is not continuing. In no event, however, will the loss rebalancing
date be postponed by more than five trading days. If the loss rebalancing date
is postponed to the last possible day, but a market disruption event occurs or
is continuing on that day or that day is not a trading day, that day will
nevertheless be the loss rebalancing date.

Quarterly rebalancing calculation date: the last valuation date of each
March, June, September and December, commencing in June 2018 and ending in
December 2027.

Quarterly rebalancing date: the first valuation date immediately following
each quarterly rebalancing calculation date, unless the calculation agent
determines that a market disruption event occurs or is continuing on that day
or that day is not otherwise a trading day. In that event, the quarterly
rebalancing date will be the first following trading day on which the
calculation agent determines that a market disruption event does not occur and
is not continuing. In no event, however, will the quarterly rebalancing date
be postponed by more than five trading days. If the quarterly rebalancing date
is postponed to the last possible day, but a market disruption event occurs or
is continuing on that day or that day is not a trading day, that day will
nevertheless be the quarterly rebalancing date.

The rebalancing adjustment on each quarterly rebalancing date will have the
effect of re-leveraging the Index-Linked Notes with the aim of resetting the
then-current leverage factor back to approximately 2. This means that after
each quarterly rebalancing date, a constant percentage increase in the closing
level of the index may have more or less of a positive effect on the value of
the Index-Linked Notes relative to before such quarterly rebalancing date.

Rebalancing date: a quarterly rebalancing date or loss rebalancing date

Rebalancing amount:

on any valuation date that is not a rebalancing date, $0; or  

on any valuation date that is a rebalancing date, the product of (i) the
result of (a) the product of (1) 2 times (2) the closing indicative note
value on the immediately preceding valuation date on which a loss rebalancing
event occurs or the immediately preceding quarterly rebalancing calculation
date (whichever is more recent) minus (b) the asset position on the
immediately preceding valuation date on which a loss rebalancing event occurs
or the immediately preceding quarterly rebalancing calculation date (whichever
is more recent) times (ii) the quotient of (a) the closing level of the
index on the current rebalancing date divided by (b) the closing level of
the index on the immediately preceding valuation date on which a loss
rebalancing event occurs or the immediately preceding quarterly rebalancing
calculation date (whichever is more recent).  

The rebalancing amount represents the change in the exposure to the index as a
result of any rebalancing event. On each rebalancing date, a rebalancing
amount is added to or subtracted from the asset position and the financing
level depending on the performance of the index since the preceding
rebalancing date so that the leverage is reset to approximately 2.

Rebalancing fee:

on any valuation date that is not a rebalancing date, $0; or  

on any valuation date that is a rebalancing date, the product of (i) the
rebalancing fee rate times (ii) the absolute value of the rebalancing amount
on such rebalancing date. In no case will the rebalancing fee be negative.  

The rebalancing fee is charged to account for the issuer's brokerage and
transaction costs due to the change in the exposure to the index.

Rebalancing fee rate: 0.06%

Consequences of a Market Disruption Event or a Non-Trading Day 

If a market disruption event occurs or is continuing on a day that would
otherwise be a redemption valuation date, the automatic redemption valuation
date, a loss rebalancing date, a quarterly rebalancing date or the final
valuation date, as applicable, or such day is not a trading day, then the
redemption valuation date, the automatic redemption valuation date, the loss
rebalancing date, the quarterly rebalancing date or the final valuation date,
as applicable, will be postponed as described above.

If the automatic redemption valuation date is postponed, the calculation agent
in its sole discretion will determine the automatic redemption index
performance factor based on the index VWAP level over a one-hour period as
soon as practicable after the cessation of the market disruption event. If the
calculation agent determines that the index VWAP level that must be used to
determine the amount payable on the Index-Linked Notes is not available on the
automatic redemption valuation date because of a market disruption event, a
non-trading day or for any other reason, then the calculation agent will
nevertheless determine the automatic redemption index performance factor in
its sole discretion.

If the calculation agent determines that the closing level of the index that
must be used to determine the amount payable on the Index-Linked Notes is not
available on a redemption valuation date, the automatic redemption valuation
date or the final valuation date because of a market disruption event, a non-
trading day or for any other reason (other than as described under "-
Discontinuance or Modification of the Index" below), then the calculation
agent will nevertheless determine the level of the index based on its
assessment, and in its sole discretion, of the level of the index on that day.

If the calculation agent determines that the closing level of the index that
must be used to determine the rebalancing amount is not available on a loss
rebalancing date or quarterly rebalancing date because of a market disruption
event, a non-trading day or for any other reason (other than as described
under "- Discontinuance or Modification of the Index" below), then the
calculation agent will nevertheless determine the rebalancing amount based on
its assessment, and in its sole discretion, of the level of the index on that
day.

Discontinuance or Modification of the Index

If the index sponsor discontinues publication of the index and the index
sponsor or anyone else publishes a substitute index that the calculation agent
determines is comparable to the index, or if the calculation agent designates
a substitute index, then the calculation agent will determine the amount
payable on the Index-Linked Notes by reference to the substitute index.
References to a successor index mean any substitute index approved by the
calculation agent.

If the calculation agent determines that the publication of the index is
discontinued and there is no successor index, the calculation agent will
determine the applicable level of the index (and, with respect to the
determination of the index VWAP, the index divisor and the available float
shares) used to determine the amount payable on the Index-Linked Notes by a
computation methodology that the calculation agent determines will as closely
as reasonably possible replicate the index.

If the calculation agent determines that the index, the stocks comprising the
index or the method of calculating the index is changed at any time in any
respect - including any split or reverse split and any addition, deletion or
substitution and any reweighting or rebalancing of the index or of the index
stocks and whether the change is made by the index sponsor under its existing
policies or following a modification of those policies, is due to the
publication of a successor index, is due to events affecting one or more of
the index stocks or their issuers or is due to any other reason - and is not
otherwise reflected in the level of the index by the index sponsor pursuant to
the then-current index methodology of the index, then the calculation agent
will be permitted (but not required) to make such adjustments in the index or
the method of its calculation as it believes are appropriate to ensure that
the levels of the index used to determine the amount payable on the Index-
Linked Notes is equitable.

All determinations and adjustments to be made by the calculation agent with
respect to the index may be made by the calculation agent in its sole
discretion. The calculation agent is not obligated to make any such
adjustments.

Default, Remedies and Waiver of Default

A holder will have special rights if an event of default with respect to his
or her series of debt securities occurs and is continuing, as described in
this subsection.

Events of Default

References to an event of default with respect to any series of debt
securities mean any of the following:

GSFC or the Company does not pay the principal or any premium on any debt
security of that series on the due date;  

GSFC or the Company does not pay interest on any debt security of that series
within 30 days after the due date;  

GSFC or the Company does not deposit a required sinking fund payment with
regard to any debt security of that series on the due date;  

GSFC remains in breach of any other covenant it makes in the GSFC 2008
Indenture for the benefit of the relevant series, for 60 days after GSFC and
the Company receive a notice of default stating that GSFC is in breach and
requiring GSFC to remedy the breach. The notice must be sent by the trustee or
the holders of at least 10% in principal amount of the relevant series of debt
securities then outstanding;  

GSFC files for bankruptcy or other events of bankruptcy, insolvency or
reorganization relating to GSFC occur. Those events must arise under U.S.
federal or state law, unless GSFC merges, consolidates or sells its assets as
described above and the successor firm is a non-U.S. entity. If that happens,
then those events must arise under U.S. federal or state law or the law of the
jurisdiction in which the successor firm is legally organized; or  

Except as provided by the GSFC 2008 Indenture, the debt security of that
series and the related guarantee, the guarantee ceases to be effective, or a
court finds the guarantee to be unenforceable or invalid, or the Company
denies its obligations as the guarantor.  

As described below under "- Remedies If an Event of Default Occurs," under the
GSFC 2008 Indenture, events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization
relating to the Company will not cause any of GSFC's debt securities issued
under such indenture to be automatically accelerated. In the event that the
Company becomes subject to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or
reorganization (but GSFC does not), any series of debt securities issued under
the GSFC 2008 Indenture will not be immediately due and repayable. In
addition, under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, a breach of a covenant or warranty by
the Company (including, for example, a breach of the Company's covenants and
warranties with respect to mergers and similar transactions or restrictions on
liens) will not have the potential to cause any of GSFC's debt securities
issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture to be declared due and payable
immediately. Instead, under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, the trustee or holder
will need to wait until the earlier of the time that (i) GSFC itself becomes
subject to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization or
otherwise defaults on the terms of the debt securities, (ii) the Company
otherwise defaults on the terms of the debt securities and (iii) the final
maturity of the debt securities. The return the holder receives on any series
of debt securities issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture may be significantly
less than what a holder would have otherwise received had the debt securities
been automatically accelerated upon certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency
or reorganization relating to the Company or declared due and payable
immediately following the breach of a covenant or warranty by the Company.

Remedies If an Event of Default Occurs

If an event of default has occurred with respect to any series of debt
securities and has not been cured or waived, the trustee or the holders of not
less than 25% in principal amount of all debt securities of that series then
outstanding may declare the entire principal amount of the debt securities of
that series to be due immediately. If the event of default occurs because of
events in bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization relating to GSFC, the
entire principal amount of the debt securities of that series will be
automatically accelerated, without any action by the trustee or any holder.

Each of the situations described above is called an acceleration of the stated
maturity of the affected series of debt securities. If the stated maturity of
any series is accelerated and a judgment for payment has not yet been
obtained, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the debt securities
of that series may cancel the acceleration for the entire series.

If an event of default occurs, the trustee will have special duties. In that
situation, the trustee will be obligated to use those of its rights and powers
under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, and to use the same degree of care and skill in
doing so, that a prudent person would use in that situation in conducting his
or her own affairs.

Except as described in the prior paragraph, the trustee is not required to
take any action under the GSFC 2008 Indenture at the request of any holders
unless the holders offer the trustee reasonable protection from expenses and
liability ( i.e. , an indemnity). If the trustee is provided with an
indemnity reasonably satisfactory to it, the holders of a majority in
principal amount of all debt securities of the relevant series may direct the
time, method and place of conducting any lawsuit or other formal legal action
seeking any remedy available to the trustee with respect to that series. These
majority holders may also direct the trustee in performing any other action
under the GSFC 2008 Indenture with respect to the debt securities of that
series.

Before a holder bypasses the trustee and bring its own lawsuit or other formal
legal action or take other steps to enforce its rights or protect its
interests relating to any debt security, all of the following must occur:

The holder must give the trustee written notice that an event of default has
occurred, and the event of default must not have been cured or waived;  

The holders of not less than 25% in principal amount of all debt securities of
a holder's series must make a written request that the trustee take action
because of the default, and they or other holders must offer to the trustee
indemnity reasonably satisfactory to the trustee against the cost and other
liabilities of taking that action;  

The trustee must not have taken action for 60 days after the above steps have
been taken; and  

During those 60 days, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the
debt securities of a holder's series must not have given the trustee
directions that are inconsistent with the written request of the holders of
not less than 25% in principal amount of the debt securities of a holder's
series.  

A holder is entitled at any time, however, to bring a lawsuit for the payment
of money due on his or her debt security on or after its stated maturity (or,
if the debt security is redeemable, on or after its redemption date).

Waiver of Default

The holders of not less than a majority in principal amount of the debt
securities of any series may waive a default for all debt securities of that
series. If this happens, the default will be treated as if it has not
occurred. No one can waive a payment default on a holder's debt security,
however, without the approval of the particular holder of that debt security.

GSFC and the Company Will Give the Trustee Information About Defaults
Annually

GSFC and the Company will furnish to the trustee every year a written
statement, respectively, of two of their officers certifying that to their
knowledge GSFC or the Company, as the case may be, is in compliance with the
GSFC 2008 Indenture and the debt securities issued under it, or else
specifying any default under the relevant debt indenture.

Default Amount on Acceleration

If an event of default occurs and the maturity of the Index-Linked Notes is
accelerated, GSFC will pay the default amount in respect of the principal of
the Index-Linked Notes at the maturity, instead of the amount payable on the
Index-Linked Notes as described earlier. The default amount is described under
"- Special Calculation Provisions" below.

For the purpose of determining whether the holders of GSFC's Medium-Term Notes
Series E, which include the Index-Linked Notes, are entitled to take any
action under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, GSFC will treat the outstanding face
amount of each Series E Note as the outstanding principal amount of that note.
Although the terms of the Index-Linked Notes differ from those of the other
Medium-Term Notes Series E, holders of specified percentages in principal
amount of all Medium-Term Notes Series E, together in some cases with other
series of GSFC's debt securities, will be able to take action affecting all
the Medium-Term Notes Series E, including the Index-Linked Notes, except with
respect to certain Medium-Term Notes Series E, if the terms of such notes
specify that the holders of specified percentages in the principal amount of
all such notes must also consent to such action. This action may involve
changing some of the terms that apply to the Medium-Term Notes Series E,
accelerating the maturity of the Medium-Term Notes Series E, after a default
or waiving some of GSFC's obligations under the GSFC 2008 Indenture. In
addition, certain changes to the GSFC 2008 Indenture and the Index-Linked
Notes that only affect certain debt securities may be made with the approval
of holders of a majority of the principal amount of such affected debt
securities.

Guarantee by the Company

The Company has fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment of principal
of, and any interest and premium on, the Medium-Term Notes, Series E, which
include the Index-Linked Notes, when due and payable, whether at the stated
maturity, by declaration of acceleration, call for redemption or otherwise, in
accordance with the terms of the security and the GSFC 2008 Indenture. The
guarantee will remain in effect until the entire principal of, and interest
and premium, if any, on, the debt securities has been paid in full or
discharged in accordance with the provisions of the GSFC 2008 Indenture, or
otherwise fully defeased by the Company.

The guarantee by the Company of its debt securities issued under the GSFC 2008
Indenture will rank equally in right of payment with all senior indebtedness
of the Company.

Mergers and Similar Transactions

GSFC and the Company are generally permitted to merge or consolidate with
another corporation or other entity. GSFC and the Company also permitted to
sell their assets substantially as an entirety to another corporation or other
entity. With regard to any series of debt securities, however, GSFC or the
Company may not take any of these actions unless all the following conditions
are met:

If the successor entity in the transaction is not GSFC or the Company, as the
case may be, the successor entity must be organized as a corporation,
partnership or trust and must expressly assume the obligations of GSFC or the
Company under the debt securities of that series and the GSFC 2008 Indenture
with respect to that series. The successor entity may be organized under the
laws of any jurisdiction, whether in the United States or elsewhere.  

Immediately after the transaction, no default under the debt securities of
that series or the related guarantees has occurred and is continuing. For this
purpose, "default under the debt securities of that series or the related
guarantees" means an event of default with respect to that series or the
related guarantees or any event that would be an event of default with respect
to that series or the related guarantees if the requirements for giving GSFC
or the Company default notice and for GSFC's or the Company's default having
to continue for a specific period of time were disregarded.  

If the conditions described above are satisfied with respect to debt
securities of any series, neither GSFC nor the Company will need to obtain the
approval of the holders of those debt securities in order to merge or
consolidate or to sell assets of GSFC or the Company. Also, these conditions
will apply only if GSFC or the Company wishes to merge or consolidate with
another entity or sell assets of GSFC or the Company substantially as an
entirety to another entity. Neither GSFC nor the Company will need to satisfy
these conditions if GSFC or the Company enters into other types of
transactions, including any transaction in which GSFC or the Company acquire
the stock or assets of another entity, any transaction that involves a change
of control of GSFC or the Company but in which GSFC or the Company does not
merge or consolidate and any transaction in which GSFC or the Company sells
less than substantially all assets of GSFC or the Company. While GSFC is
currently a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, there is no requirement
that it remain a subsidiary.

Also, if GSFC or the Company merges, consolidates or sells assets of GSFC or
the Company substantially as an entirety and the successor is a non-U.S.
entity, neither GSFC nor any successor would have any obligation to compensate
a holder for any resulting adverse tax consequences relating to his or her
debt securities.

Restriction on Liens

In the GSFC 2008 Indenture, the Company promises, with respect to each series
of senior debt securities, not to create, assume, incur or guarantee any debt
for borrowed money that is secured by a lien on the voting or profit
participating equity ownership interests that the Company or any of its
subsidiaries own in Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, or in any subsidiary of the
Company that beneficially owns or holds, directly or indirectly, those
interests in Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, unless the Company also secures the
senior debt securities of that series on an equal or priority basis with the
other secured debt. The promise of the Company, however, is subject to an
important exception: it may secure debt for borrowed money with liens on those
interests without securing the senior debt securities of any series if its
board of directors determines that the liens do not materially detract from or
interfere with the value or control of those interests, as of the date of the
determination.

Except as noted above, the GSFC 2008 Indenture does not restrict the Company's
ability to put liens on its interests in its subsidiaries other than Goldman
Sachs & Co. LLC, nor does the indenture restrict the Company's ability to sell
or otherwise dispose of its interests in any of its subsidiaries, including
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC. In addition, the restriction on liens in the GSFC
2008 Indenture applies only to liens that secure debt for borrowed money. For
example, liens imposed by operation of law, such as liens to secure statutory
obligations for taxes or workers' compensation benefits, or liens the Company
creates to secure obligations to pay legal judgments or surety bonds, would
not be covered by this restriction.

Modification of the Debt Indenture and Waiver of Covenants

There are four types of changes GSFC and the Company can make to the GSFC 2008
Indenture and the debt securities or series of debt securities and related
guarantees issued under the GSFC 2008 Indenture.

Changes Requiring Each Holder's Approval

First, there are changes that cannot be made without the approval of the
holder of each debt security affected by the change under the GSFC 2008
Indenture. Here is a list of those types of changes:

change the stated maturity for any principal or interest payment on a debt
security;  

reduce the principal amount, the amount payable on acceleration of the stated
maturity after a default, the interest rate or the redemption price for a debt
security;  

permit redemption of a debt security if not previously permitted;  

impair any right a holder may have to require repayment of its debt security;  

change the currency of any payment on a debt security;  

change the place of payment on a debt security;  

impair a holder's right to sue for payment of any amount due on its debt
security;  

reduce the percentage in principal amount of the debt securities of any one or
more affected series, taken  

separately or together, as applicable, and whether comprising the same or
different series or less than all of the debt securities of a series, the
approval of whose holders is needed to change the applicable debt indenture or
those debt securities;  

reduce the percentage in principal amount of the debt securities of any one or
more affected series, taken separately or together, as applicable, and whether
comprising the same or different series or less than all of the debt
securities of a series, the consent of whose holders is needed to waive GSFC's
compliance with the applicable debt indenture or to waive defaults; and  

change the provisions of the applicable debt indenture dealing with
modification and waiver in any other respect, except to increase any required
percentage referred to above or to add to the provisions that cannot be
changed or waived without approval of the holder of each affected debt
security.  

Changes Not Requiring Approval

The second type of change does not require any approval by holders of the debt
securities affected. These changes are limited to clarifications and changes
that would not adversely affect any debt securities of any series in any
material respect. Neither GSFC nor the Company needs any approval to make
changes that affect only debt securities to be issued under the applicable
indenture after the changes take effect.

GSFC and the Company may also make changes or obtain waivers that do not
adversely affect a particular debt security, even if they affect other debt
securities. In those cases, neither GSFC nor the Company needs to obtain the
approval of the holder of the unaffected debt security; GSFC and the Company
need only obtain any required approvals from the holders of the affected debt
securities.

Changes Requiring Majority Approval

Any other change to the GSFC 2008 Indenture and the debt securities issued
under such debt indenture would require the following approval:

If the change affects only particular debt securities within a series, it must
be approved by the holders of a majority in principal amount of such
particular debt securities.  

If the change affects multiple debt securities of one or more series, it must
be approved by the holders of a majority in principal amount of all debt
securities affected by the change, with all such affected debt securities
voting together as one class for this purpose (and by the holders of a
majority in principal amount of any affected debt securities that by their
terms are entitled to vote separately).  

In each case, the required approval must be given by written consent.

This would mean that modification of terms with respect to certain debt
securities of a series could be effectuated under the GSFC 2008 Indenture
without obtaining the consent of the holders of a majority in principal amount
of other securities of such series that are not affected by such modification.

The same majority approval would be required for GSFC to obtain a waiver of
any of its covenants in the GSFC 2008 Indenture. GSFC's covenants include the
promises GSFC and the Company make about merging and, with respect to the
Company, putting liens on GSFC's interests in Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC. If the
holders approve a waiver of a covenant, neither GSFC nor the Company will have
to comply with it. The holders, however, cannot approve a waiver of any
provision in a particular debt security, or in the GSFC 2008 Indenture as it
affects that debt security, that neither GSFC nor the Company can change
without the approval of the holder of that debt security as described above in
"- Changes Requiring Each Holder's Approval," unless that holder approves the
waiver.

Special Rules for Action by Holders

When holders take any action under the GSFC 2008 Indenture, such as giving a
notice of default, declaring an acceleration, approving any change or waiver
or giving the trustee an instruction, GSFC will apply the following rules.

Only Outstanding Debt Securities Are Eligible

Only holders of outstanding debt securities or the outstanding debt securities
of the applicable series, as applicable, will be eligible to participate in
any action by holders of such debt securities or the debt securities of that
series. Also, GSFC will count only outstanding debt securities in determining
whether the various percentage requirements for taking action have been met.
For these purposes, a debt security will not be "outstanding" if:

it has been surrendered for cancellation;  

GSFC has deposited or set aside, in trust for its holder, money for its
payment or redemption;  

GSFC has fully defeased it; or  

GSFC or one of its affiliates, such as Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, is the owner.  

Determining Record Dates for Action by Holders

GSFC and the Company will generally be entitled to set any day as a record
date for the purpose of determining the holders that are entitled to take
action under a particular debt indenture. In certain limited circumstances,
only the trustee will be entitled to set a record date for action by holders.
If GSFC, the Company or the trustee set a record date for an approval or other
action to be taken by holders, that vote or action may be taken only by
persons or entities who are holders on the record date and must be taken
during the period that GSFC specifies for this purpose, or that the trustee
specifies if it sets the record date. GSFC, the Company or the trustee, as
applicable, may shorten or lengthen this period from time to time.

This period, however, may not extend beyond the 180th day after the record
date for the action. In addition, record dates for any global debt security
may be set in accordance with procedures established by the depositary from
time to time. Accordingly, record dates for global debt securities may differ
from those for other debt securities.

Bloomberg symbols:

The Bloomberg symbols under which information relating to the Index-Linked
Notes can be located are set forth below. The publication of this information
may occasionally be subject to delay or postponement.

Closing level of the index and intraday level of the index: RU10GRTR Index  

Closing indicative note value and intraday indicative note value: FRLGIV Index  

Asset position: FRLGAP Index  

Financing level: FRLGFL Index  

Loss rebalancing trigger: FRLGRT Index  

Automatic redemption trigger: FRLGAT Index  

Modified Business Day

Any payment on the Index-Linked Notes that would otherwise be due on a day
that is not a business day may instead be paid on the next day that is a
business day, with the same effect as if paid on the original due date. The
business day term is discussed under "- Special Calculation Provisions" below.

Role of Calculation Agent

The calculation agent in its sole discretion will make all determinations
regarding the index, market disruption events, business days, trading days,
including determining the closing level or intraday level of the index on any
valuation date; the 3-month USD LIBOR rate; whether the Index-Linked Notes
will be redeemed; the valuation dates; the final valuation date; the
redemption valuation dates; the automatic redemption valuation date, the
redemption dates, the stated maturity date and the amount payable on the
Index-Linked Notes. Absent manifest error, all determinations of the
calculation agent will be final and binding on holders of the Index-Linked
Notes and GSFC, without any liability on the part of the calculation agent.

Special Calculation Provisions

Business Day

References to a business day with respect to the Index-Linked Notes mean each
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday that is not a day on which
banking institutions in New York City generally are authorized or obligated by
law, regulation or executive order to close.

London Business Day

References to a London business day with respect to the Index-Linked Notes
mean each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday that is not a day on
which banking institutions in London generally are authorized or obligated by
law, regulation or executive order to close and is also a day on which
dealings in the applicable index currency are transacted in the London
interbank market.

Trading Day

References to a trading day with respect to the Index-Linked Notes mean a day
on which the respective principal securities markets for all of the index
stocks are open for trading, the index sponsor is open for business and the
index is calculated and published by the index sponsor.

Closing Level of the Index

References to the closing level of the index on any trading day mean the
closing level of the index or any successor index reported by Bloomberg
Financial Services, or any successor reporting service GSFC may select, on
such trading day for the index. Currently, whereas the index sponsor publishes
the official closing level of the index to six decimal places, Bloomberg
Financial Services reports the closing level of the index to fewer decimal
places. As a result, the closing level of the index reported by Bloomberg
Financial Services generally may be lower or higher than the official closing
level of the index published by the index sponsor.

Intraday Level of the Index

References to the intraday level of the index at any time on any trading day
mean the level of the index or any successor index reported by Bloomberg
Financial Services, or any successor reporting service GSFC may select, at
such time on such trading day for the index. Currently, whereas the index
sponsor publishes the official level of the index to six decimal places,
Bloomberg Financial Services reports the level of the index to fewer decimal
places. As a result, the level of the index reported by Bloomberg Financial
Services generally may be lower or higher than the official level of the index
published by the index sponsor.

Default Amount

The default amount for the Index-Linked Notes on any day (except as provided
in the last sentence under "- Default Quotation Period" below) will be an
amount, in the specified currency for the principal of the Index-Linked Notes,
equal to the cost of having a qualified financial institution, of the kind and
selected as described below, expressly assume all of GSFC's payment and other
obligations with respect to the Index-Linked Notes as of that day and as if no
default or acceleration had occurred, or to undertake other obligations
providing substantially equivalent economic value to holders with respect to
their notes. That cost will equal:

the lowest amount that a qualified financial institution would charge to
effect this assumption or undertaking, plus  

the reasonable expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the
holder of the Index-Linked Notes in preparing any documentation necessary for
this assumption or undertaking.  

During the default quotation period for a holder's notes, which is described
below, the holder and/or GSFC may request a qualified financial institution to
provide a quotation of the amount it would charge to effect this assumption or
undertaking. If either party obtains a quotation, it must notify the other
party in writing of the quotation. The amount referred to in the first bullet
point above will equal the lowest - or, if there is only one, the only -
quotation obtained, and as to which notice is so given, during the default
quotation period. With respect to any quotation, however, the party not
obtaining the quotation may object, on reasonable and significant grounds, to
the assumption or undertaking by the qualified financial institution providing
the quotation and notify the other party in writing of those grounds within
two business days after the last day of the default quotation period, in which
case that quotation will be disregarded in determining the default amount.

Default Quotation Period

The default quotation period is the period beginning on the day the default
amount first becomes due and ending on the third business day after that day,
unless:

no quotation of the kind referred to above is obtained, or  

every quotation of that kind obtained is objected to within five business days
after the day the default amount first becomes due.  

If either of these two events occurs, the default quotation period will
continue until the third business day after the first business day on which
prompt notice of a quotation is given as described above. If that quotation is
objected to as described above within five business days after that first
business day, however, the default quotation period will continue as described
in the prior sentence and this sentence.

In any event, if the default quotation period and the subsequent two business
day objection period have not ended before the final valuation date, then the
default amount will equal the principal amount of the Index-Linked Notes.

Qualified Financial Institutions

For the purpose of determining the default amount at any time, a qualified
financial institution must be a financial institution organized under the laws
of any jurisdiction in the United States of America, Europe or Japan, which at
that time has outstanding debt obligations with a stated maturity of one year
or less from the date of issue and that is, or whose securities are, rated
either:

A-1 or higher by Standard & Poor's Ratings Services or any successor, or any
other comparable rating then used by that rating agency, or  

P-1 or higher by Moody's Investors Service, Inc. or any successor, or any
other comparable rating then used by that rating agency.  

Market Disruption Event

With respect to any given trading day, any of the following will be a market
disruption event:

a suspension, absence or material limitation of trading in index stocks
constituting 20% or more, by weight, of the index on their respective primary
markets, in each case for more than two consecutive hours of trading or during
the one-half hour before the close of trading in that market, as determined by
the calculation agent in its sole discretion, or  

a suspension, absence or material limitation of trading in option or futures
contracts relating to the index or to index stocks constituting 20% or more,
by weight, of the index in the respective primary markets for those contracts,
in each case for more than two consecutive hours of trading or during the one-
half hour before the close of trading in that market, as determined by the
calculation agent in its sole discretion, or  

index stocks constituting 20% or more, by weight, of the index, or option or
futures contracts, if available, relating to the index or to index stocks
constituting 20% or more, by weight, of the index are not trading on what were
the respective primary markets for those index stocks or contracts or are
subject to a material reduction in trading volume, each as determined by the
calculation agent in its sole discretion,  

and , in the case of any of these events, the calculation agent determines
in its sole discretion that the event could materially interfere with the
ability of GSFC or any of its affiliates or a similarly situated party to
unwind all or a material portion of a hedge that could be effected with
respect to the offered notes.

The following events will not be market disruption events:

a limitation on the hours or numbers of days of trading, but only if the
limitation results from an announced change in the regular business hours of
the relevant market, and  

a decision to permanently discontinue trading in option or futures contracts
relating to the index or to any index stock.  

For this purpose, an "absence of trading" in the primary securities market on
which an index stock, or on which option or futures contracts relating to the
index or an index stock, are traded will not include any time when that market
is itself closed for trading under ordinary circumstances. In contrast, a
suspension or limitation of trading in an index stock or in option or futures
contracts, if available, relating to the index or an index stock in the
primary market for that stock or those contracts, by reason of:

a price change exceeding limits set by that market,  

an imbalance of orders relating to that index stock or those contracts, or  

a disparity in bid and ask quotes relating to that index stock or those
contracts,  

will constitute a suspension or material limitation of trading in that stock
or those contracts in that market.

Further, for this purpose, a "material reduction in trading volume" will be
deemed to occur on a trading day at any time that the reported trading volume
on that trading day falls below 75% of the trailing 30-trading-day average
trading volume ("30-day ADTV"), where the 30-day ADTV is adjusted by a ratio
of the elapsed hours in such trading day divided by the total number of
scheduled hours for such trading day.

As is the case throughout this description of the Index-Linked Notes,
references to the index in this description of market disruption events
includes the index and any successor index as it may be modified, replaced or
adjusted from time to time.

EX-10.20 3 d192225dex1020.htm EX-10.20  EX-10.20

Exhibit 10.20

Description of PMD Retiree Medical Program

Under the retiree medical program in effect as of December 31, 2021,
Participating Managing Directors ("PMDs") who retire with eight or more years
of service as PMDs are eligible to receive retiree medical coverage for
themselves and their eligible dependents. The PMD retiree medical program
provides, as of December 31, 2021, a subsidy for such coverage of up to 75% of
the applicable premium.

During 2020, the firm amended the PMD retiree medical program so that,
effective January 1, 2022, individuals who became PMDs on or before December
31, 2020 ("Grandfathered PMDs"), and who retire or retired with eight or more
years of PMD service, will be eligible for retiree medical coverage with a
subsidy of up to 100% of the premium attributable to individual coverage for
the PMD retiree, but without any subsidy for the premium attributable to
covering the PMD's covered dependents. PMDs other than Grandfathered PMDs no
longer will receive a firm subsidy toward retiree medical coverage and will be
required to pay 100% of the applicable premium for retiree and dependent
coverage.

A PMD's eligibility under the PMD retiree medical program generally terminates
if the PMD engages in conduct constituting cause or if the PMD goes to work
for a competitor. A PMD with less than eight years of service, or who goes to
work for a non-competitor, may be eligible for retiree medical coverage but
not the subsidy. The PMD retiree medical program, coverage and/or subsidy can
be amended or terminated at any time as provided in the applicable plan
documents.EX-10.39 4 d192225dex1039.htm EX-10.39  EX-10.39

Exhibit 10.39

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

O UTSIDE DIRECTOR  RSU AWARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your  award of RSUs
(your "Award") that will be granted to you as set forth on your Award
Statement. You should read carefully this entire Award Agreement, which
includes the Award Statement and any attached Appendix.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

1. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

2. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
Date[s] of Grant, the [calculation that will be used to determine the] number
of RSUs [that will be] awarded to you [on any such Date of Grant] and the
Delivery Date.

3. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

D ELIVERY OF YOUR RSU SHARES 

4. Delivery . RSU Shares (less applicable withholding) will be
delivered in respect of your Outstanding RSUs reasonably promptly (but no more
than 30 Business Days) after the Delivery Date listed on your Award Statement.
Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, delivery of the RSU Shares will
be effected by book-entry credit to your Account and no delivery of RSU Shares
will be made unless you have timely established your Account. Until such
delivery, you have only the rights of a general unsecured creditor, and no
rights as a shareholder of GS Inc.

D IVIDEND EQUIVALENT RIGHTS 

5. Dividend Equivalent Rights . Each RSU includes a Dividend
Equivalent Right, which entitles you to receive an amount (less applicable
withholding), at or after the time of distribution of any regular cash
dividend paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock, equal to any
regular cash dividend payment that would have been made in respect of an RSU
Share underlying your Outstanding RSUs for any record date that occurs on or
after the Date of Grant.

A CCELERATED DELIVERY 

6. Accelerated Delivery in the Event of Conflicted Employment or Death
. In the event of your Conflicted Employment or death, your Outstanding
Award will be treated as described in this Paragraph 6, and all other terms of
this Award Agreement continue to apply.

(a) You Are Determined to Have Accepted Conflicted Employment.

(i) Generally. Unless prohibited by applicable law or regulation, if you
accept Conflicted Employment, as soon as practicable after the Committee has
received satisfactory documentation relating to your Conflicted Employment,
RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of your Outstanding RSUs (including in
the form of cash as described in Paragraph 7(b)).

(ii) You May Have to Take Other Steps to Address Conflicts of Interest. The
Committee retains the authority to exercise its rights under the Award
Agreement or the Plan (including Section 1.3.2 of the Plan) to take or require
you to take other steps it determines in its sole discretion to be necessary
or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest (which may
include a determination that the accelerated delivery described in Paragraph
6(a)(i) will not apply because such actions are not necessary or appropriate
to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest).

(b) Death. If you die, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding RSUs will
be delivered to the representative of your estate as soon as practicable after
the date of death and after such documentation as may be requested by the
Committee is provided to the Committee.

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

7. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
RSU Shares is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable withholding
taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, provided that the Committee
may determine not to apply the withholding rate described in Section 3.2.2 of
the Plan.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property Instead of RSU Shares. In
accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole discretion of the
Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the RSU Shares, the Firm may
deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan or other property,
and all references in this Award Agreement to deliveries of RSU Shares will
include such deliveries of cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan
or other property.

(c) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on RSU Shares. GS Inc. may
affix to Certificates representing RSU Shares any legend that the Committee
determines to be necessary or advisable. GS Inc. may advise the transfer agent
to place a stop order against any legended RSU Shares.

(d) You Agree to Certain Consents. By accepting this Award, you have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable.

N ON-TRANSFERABILITY 

8. Non-transferability. Except as otherwise may be provided in this
Paragraph 8 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the limitations
on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply to this
Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the provisions of
this Paragraph 8 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The Committee may
adopt procedures pursuant to which you may transfer some or all of your RSUs
through a gift for no consideration to any child, stepchild, grandchild,
parent, stepparent, grandparent, spouse, sibling, niece, nephew, mother-in-
law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-
law, including adoptive relationships, any person sharing the recipient's
household (other than a tenant or employee), a trust in which these persons
have more than 50% of the beneficial interest, and any other entity in which
these persons (or the recipient) own more than 50% of the voting interests.

G OVERNING LAW 

9. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

10. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 10 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 10 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
10 will govern.

(b) Delivery of RSU Shares will not be delayed beyond the date on which all
applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares required by
this Agreement (including those specified in Paragraphs 4, 6(b) and 7 and the
consents and other items specified in Section 3.3 of the Plan) are satisfied,
and will occur by December 31 of the calendar year in which the Delivery Date
occurs unless, in order to permit such conditions or restrictions to be
satisfied, the Committee elects, pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or
otherwise as may be permitted in accordance with Section 409A, to delay
delivery of RSU Shares to a later date as may be permitted under Section 409A,
including Reg. 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt, if the Award includes
a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg. 1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii),
your right to the series of installment payments will be treated as a right to
a series of separate payments and not as a right to a single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 7(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any securities,
other Awards or other property that the Firm may deliver in respect of your
RSUs will not have the effect of deferring delivery or payment, income
inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture, beyond the date on which such
delivery, payment or inclusion would occur or such risk of forfeiture would
lapse, with respect to the RSU Shares that would otherwise have been
deliverable (unless the Committee elects a later date for this purpose
pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted under
Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the subsequent election
provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. 1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Notwithstanding the timing provisions of Paragraph 6(b), the delivery of
RSU Shares referred to therein will be made after the date of death and during
the calendar year that includes the date of death (or on such later date as
may be permitted under Section 409A).

(e) Notwithstanding any provision of Paragraph 5 or Section 2.8.2 of the Plan
to the contrary, the Dividend Equivalent Rights with respect to each of your
Outstanding RSUs will be paid to you within the calendar year that includes
the date of distribution of any corresponding

regular cash dividends paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock
the record date for which occurs on or after the Date of Grant. The payment
will be in an amount (less applicable withholding) equal to such regular
dividend payment as would have been made in respect of the RSU Shares
underlying such Outstanding RSUs.

(f) The timing of delivery or payment referred to in Paragraph 6(a)(i) will be
the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) within the calendar year in which
the Committee receives satisfactory documentation relating to your Conflicted
Employment, provided that such delivery or payment will be made, and any
Committee action referred to in Paragraph 6(a)(i) will be taken, only at such
time as, and if and to the extent that it, as reasonably determined by the
Firm, would not result in the imposition of any additional tax to you under
Section 409A.

(g) Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are 409A Deferred
Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(h) Delivery of RSU Shares in respect of this Award may be made, if and to the
extent elected by the Committee, later than the Delivery Date or other date or
period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award that constitutes
409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later delivery is
permitted under Section 409A).

(i) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

A MENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

11. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided , that, notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further , that the Committee expressly
reserves the right to accelerate the delivery of the RSU Shares and in its
discretion to provide that such Shares may not be transferable until the
Delivery Date. A modification that impacts the tax consequences of this Award
or the timing of delivery of RSU Shares will not be an amendment that
materially adversely affects your rights and obligations under this Award
Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement will be in writing.

12. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

13. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority includes federal, state and local
government agencies such as

the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and any state or local
human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York State Division of Human Rights,
the New York City Commission on Human Rights, the California Department of
Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the [applicable] Date of Grant [for each Award
granted hereunder].

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.  

Accepted and Agreed:

By: 

Print Name:  

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan.

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(g) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(h) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(i) " Conflicted Employment " means the Grantee's employment at any U.S.
Federal, state or local government, any non-U.S. government, any supranational
or international organization, any self-regulatory organization, or any agency
or instrumentality of any such government or organization, or any other
employer determined by the Committee, if, as a result of such employment, the
Grantee's continued holding of any Outstanding Award or Shares at Risk would
result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest.

(j) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(k) " Delivery Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a delivery date, provided, unless the Committee determines
otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if such date is not during
a Window Period, the first trading day of the first Window Period beginning
after such date.

(l) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(m) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(n) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(o) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(p) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been forfeited,
canceled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the shares of Common
Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered or other
payments made.

(q) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit Award granted under the Plan,
which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common
Stock in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(r) " RSU Shares " means shares of Common Stock that underlie an RSU.

(s) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(t) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which all
employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock
(provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of employees
who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be a period
designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such designated
group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.40 5 d192225dex1040.htm EX-10.40  EX-10.40

Exhibit 10.40

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

[O NE-TIME][YEAR-END] RSU AWARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your 
award of RSUs (your "Award"). You should read carefully this entire Award
Agreement, which includes the Award Statement, any attached Appendix and the
signature card.

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph [15][16].

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
number of RSUs awarded to you and any applicable Vesting Dates[,] [and]
Delivery Dates [and Transferability Dates].

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR RSUS 

5. Vesting . On each Vesting Date listed on your Award Statement,
you will become Vested in the amount of Outstanding RSUs listed next to that
date. When an RSU becomes Vested, it means only that your continued active
Employment is not required for delivery of that portion of RSU Shares.
Vesting does not mean you have a non-forfeitable right to the Vested portion
of your Award. The terms of this Award Agreement (including conditions to
delivery [and any applicable Transfer Restrictions]) continue to apply to
Vested RSUs, and you can still forfeit Vested RSUs and any RSU Shares.

D ELIVERY OF YOUR RSU SHARES 

6. Delivery . Reasonably promptly (but no more than 30 Business
Days) after each Delivery Date listed on your Award Statement, RSU Shares
(less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph [12]
) will be
delivered (by book entry credit to your Account) in respect of the amount of
Outstanding RSUs listed next to that date. The Committee or the SIP Committee
may select multiple dates within the 30-Business-Day period following the
Delivery Date to deliver RSU Shares in respect of all or a portion of the RSUs
with the same Delivery Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such dates
will be treated as a single Delivery Date for purposes of this Award. Until
such delivery, you have only the rights of a general unsecured creditor, and
no rights as a shareholder of GS Inc. Without limiting the Committee's
authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the Firm may accelerate any
Delivery Date by up to 30 days.

[T RANSFER RESTRICTIONS FOLLOWING DELIVERY 

7. Transfer Restrictions and Shares at Risk . All RSU Shares that
are delivered on any date in respect of RSUs after tax withholding will be
Shares at Risk subject to Transfer Restrictions until the applicable
Transferability Date listed on your Award Statement. Any purported sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposition in violation of the Transfer Restrictions on Shares
at Risk will be void. Within 30 Business Days after the applicable
Transferability Date listed on your Award Statement (or any other date on
which the Transfer Restrictions are to be removed), GS Inc. will remove the
Transfer Restrictions. The Committee or the SIP Committee may select multiple
dates within such 30-Business-Day period on which to remove Transfer
Restrictions for all or a portion of the Shares at Risk with the same
Transferability Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such dates will be
treated as a single Transferability Date for purposes of this Award.]

D IVIDENDS 

8. [Dividend Equivalent Rights and] Dividends . [Each RSU includes
a Dividend Equivalent Right, which entitles you to receive an amount (less
applicable withholding), at or after the time of distribution of any regular
cash dividend paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock, equal to
any regular cash dividend payment that would have been made in respect of an
RSU Share underlying your Outstanding RSUs for any record date that occurs on
or after the Date of Grant.] [You will be entitled to receive on a current
basis any regular cash dividend paid in respect of your Shares at Risk. The
RSUs do not include Dividend Equivalent Rights.]

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

9. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph [8][9] sets
forth the events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and
[Shares at Risk and] may require repayment to the Firm of up to all other
amounts previously delivered or paid to you under your Award in accordance
with Paragraph [9][10]. More than one event may apply, and in no case will the
occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment obligations as a
result of the occurrence of any other event. In addition, the Firm reserves
the right to (a) suspend vesting of Outstanding RSUs, [payments under Dividend
Equivalent Rights or] delivery of RSU Shares [or release of Transfer
Restrictions], (b) deliver any RSU Shares[,] [or] dividends [or payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights] into an escrow account in accordance with
Paragraph [12]
(v) or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares
in connection with any investigation of whether any of the events that result
in forfeiture under the Plan or this Paragraph [8][9] have occurred. Paragraph
[10][11] (relating to certain circumstances under which you will not forfeit
your unvested RSUs upon Employment termination) and Paragraph [11][12]
(relating to certain circumstances under which vesting[, delivery] and/or
[delivery] [release of Transfer Restrictions] may be accelerated) provide for
exceptions to one or more provisions of this Paragraph [8][9]. [The U.K.
Material Risk Taker Appendix supplements this Paragraph 9 and sets forth
additional events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and
Shares at Risk and may require repayment to the Firm as described in Paragraph
10 and the Appendix.]

(a) Unvested RSUs Forfeited if Your Employment Terminates. If your
Employment terminates for any reason or you are otherwise no longer actively
Employed with the Firm (which includes off-premises notice periods, "garden
leaves," pay in lieu of notice or any other similar status), your rights to
your Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested will terminate, and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(b) Vested and Unvested RSUs Forfeited [if You Solicit Clients or Employees,
Interfere with Client or Employee Relationships or Participate in the Hiring
of Employees] [Upon Certain Events]. If any of the following occurs before
the applicable Delivery Date, your rights to all of your Outstanding RSUs
(whether or not Vested) will terminate, and no RSU Shares will be delivered in
respect of such RSUs:

(i) [You Solicit Clients or Employees, Interfere with Client or Employee
Relationships or Participate in the Hiring of Employees. Either:]

[(A)] you, in any manner, directly or indirectly, [(A)][(1)] Solicit any
Client to transact business with a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain
from doing any business with the Firm, [(B)][(2)] interfere with or damage (or
attempt to interfere with or damage) any relationship between the Firm and any
Client, [(C)][(3)] Solicit any person who is an employee of the Firm to resign
from the Firm, [(D)][(4)] Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or
accept employment (or other association) with any person or entity other than
the Firm or [(E)][(5)] participate in the hiring of any Selected Firm
Personnel by any person or entity other than the Firm (including, without
limitation, participating in the identification of individuals for potential
hire, and participating in any hiring decision), whether as an employee or
consultant or otherwise, or

(ii) [(B)] Selected Firm Personnel are Solicited, hired or accepted into
partnership, membership or similar status by any entity where you have, or
will have, direct or indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm
Personnel, unless the Committee determines that you were not involved in such
Solicitation, hiring or acceptance.

(iii) [GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. GS Inc.
fails to maintain the required "Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio" as defined under
Federal Reserve Board Regulations applicable to GS Inc. for a period of 90
consecutive business days.]

(iv) [GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. The Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the "FDIC")
makes a written recommendation under Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority)
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for the
appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of GS Inc. based on a determination that
GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of default."]

(c) Vested and Unvested RSUs [and Shares at Risk] Forfeited upon Certain
Events. If any of the following occurs [(i)] your rights to all of your
Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate, and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs [and (ii) your rights to all of your
Shares at Risk will terminate and your Shares at Risk will be cancelled, in
each case], as may be further described below:

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before the applicable
Delivery Date [for RSUs or the applicable Transferability Date for Shares at
Risk].

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee

determines that, before the applicable Delivery Date [for RSUs or the
applicable Transferability Date for Shares at Risk], you failed to meet, in
any respect, any obligation under any agreement with the Firm, or any
agreement entered into in connection with your Employment or this Award,
including the Firm's notice period requirement applicable to you, any offer
letter, employment agreement or any shareholders' agreement relating to the
Firm. Your failure to pay or reimburse the Firm, on demand, for any amount you
owe to the Firm will constitute (A) failure to meet an obligation you have
under an agreement, regardless of whether such obligation arises under a
written agreement, and/or (B) a material violation of Firm policy constituting
Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph [15][16] or Section 3.17 of the
Plan, or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
([vii][viii]).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Outstanding RSUs [or Shares at Risk];
provided , however , that your rights will only be terminated in respect
of the RSUs [and Shares at Risk] that are replaced, substituted for or
otherwise considered by such other entity in making its grant.

(viii) [You Receive Compensation that this Award Is Intended to Replace.
This Award is intended to replace or substitute for any award or compensation
forgone with an entity to which you previously provided services, and such
entity nevertheless delivers to you such award or compensation (including any
cash, equity or other property (whether vested or unvested)), as determined by
the Firm in its sole discretion.]

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

10. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award . If the Committee
determines that any term of this Award was not satisfied, you will be
required, immediately upon demand therefor, to repay to the Firm the
following:

(a) Any RSU Shares [(which, for the avoidance of doubt, includes Shares at
Risk)] for which the terms (including the terms for delivery) of the related
RSUs were not satisfied, in accordance with Section 2.6.3 of the Plan.

(b) Any [payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights] [Shares at Risk] for which
the terms [(including the terms for release of Transfer Restrictions)] were
not satisfied [(including any such payments made in respect of RSUs that are
forfeited or RSU Shares that are cancelled or

required to be repaid)], in accordance with Section [2.8.3][2.5.3] of the
Plan.

(c) Any dividends paid in respect of any RSU Shares that are cancelled or
required to be repaid.

(d) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any RSUs, RSU Shares[,][and] dividend payments [and payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights] that are forfeited or required to be repaid.

E XCEPTIONS TO THE VESTING[, DELIVERY] AND/OR [DELIVERY] [TRANSFERABILITY]
DATES 

11. Circumstances Under Which You Will Not Forfeit Your Unvested RSUs on
Employment Termination (but the Original Delivery Date [and Transferability
Date] Continue[s] to Apply) . If your Employment terminates at a time
when you meet the requirements for Extended Absence[, Retirement,]
["downsizing" or Approved Termination,] [each] as described below, then
Paragraph [8]
 will not apply, and your Outstanding RSUs will be treated
as described in this Paragraph [10][11]. All other terms of this Award
Agreement, including the other forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs
[8][9] and [9][10], continue to apply.

(a) [Extended Absence [or Retirement] and No Association With a Covered
Enterprise.]

(i) Generally. If your Employment terminates by Extended Absence [or
Retirement], your Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested will become Vested.
However, your rights to any Outstanding RSU that becomes Vested by this
Paragraph [10]
[(i)] will terminate and no RSU Share will be
delivered in respect of that RSU if you Associate With a Covered Enterprise on
or before the originally scheduled Vesting Date for that RSU.

(ii) [Special Treatment for Involuntary or Mutual Agreement Termination. The
second sentence of Paragraph [10]
[(i)] (relating to forfeiture if you
Associate With a Covered Enterprise) will not apply if (A) the Firm
characterizes your Employment termination as "involuntary" or by "mutual
agreement" (and, in each case, you have not engaged in conduct constituting
Cause) and (B) you execute a general waiver and release of claims and an
agreement to pay any associated tax liability, in each case, in the form the
Firm prescribes. No Employment termination that you initiate, including any
purported "constructive termination," a "termination for good reason" or
similar concepts, can be "involuntary" or by "mutual agreement."]

(b) [Downsizing. If (i) the Firm terminates your Employment solely by reason
of a "downsizing" (and you have not engaged in conduct constituting Cause) and
(ii) you execute a general waiver and release of claims and an agreement to
pay any associated tax liability, in each case, in the form the Firm
prescribes, your Outstanding RSUs that are not yet Vested will become Vested.
Whether or not your Employment is terminated solely by reason of a
"downsizing" will be determined by the Firm in its sole discretion.]

(c) [Approved Terminations of Fixed-Term Employees. If the Firm classifies
you as a "fixed-term" employee and your Employment terminates solely by reason
of an Approved Termination (and you have not engaged in conduct constituting
Cause), your Outstanding RSUs that are not yet Vested will become Vested.]

12. Accelerated Vesting[,] [and/or] Delivery [and/or Release of Transfer
Restrictions] in the Event of a Qualifying Termination After a Change in
Control[, Conflicted Employment] or

Death . In the event of your Qualifying Termination After a Change
in Control[, Conflicted Employment] or death, each as described below, then
Paragraph [8]
 will not apply, your Outstanding RSUs [and Shares at Risk]
will be treated as described in this Paragraph [11][12], and, except as set
forth in Paragraph [11]
, all other terms of this Award Agreement,
including the other forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs [8][9] and
[9][10], continue to apply.

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a Change in Control, the RSU Shares underlying your
Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will be delivered[, and any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply]. In addition, the forfeiture events in
Paragraph 8 will not apply to your Award.

(b) [You Are Determined to Have Accepted Conflicted Employment.

(i) Generally. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan or
otherwise, for purposes of this Award Agreement, "Conflicted Employment" means
your employment at any U.S. Federal, state or local government, any non-U.S.
government, any supranational or international organization, any self-
regulatory organization, or any agency or instrumentality of any such
government or organization, or any other employer (other than an "Accounting
Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of Regulation S-X or any
successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a result of such
employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs would result in an
actual or perceived conflict of interest. Unless prohibited by applicable law
or regulation, the following will apply as soon as practicable after the
Committee has received satisfactory documentation relating to your Conflicted
Employment.

(A) Vesting. If your Employment terminates solely because you resign to
accept Conflicted Employment and you have completed at least three years of
continuous service with the Firm, your Outstanding RSUs will Vest; otherwise,
you will forfeit any Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested in accordance with
Paragraph 8(a).

(B) Delivery. If your Employment terminates solely because you resign to
accept Conflicted Employment or if, following your termination of Employment,
you notify the Firm that you are accepting Conflicted Employment, RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of your Outstanding Vested RSUs (including in the
form of cash as described in Paragraph 12(b)).

(ii) You May Have to Take Other Steps to Address Conflicts of Interest. The
Committee retains the authority to exercise its rights under the Award
Agreement or the Plan (including Section 1.3.2 of the Plan) to take or require
you to take other steps it determines in its sole discretion to be necessary
or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest (which may
include a determination that the accelerated vesting and/or delivery described
in Paragraph 11(b)(i) will not apply because such actions are not necessary or
appropriate to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest).]

(c) Death. If you die, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding RSUs
(whether or not Vested) will be delivered to the representative of your estate
[and any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply] as soon as practicable
after the date of death and after such documentation as may be requested by
the Committee is provided to the Committee.

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

13. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
RSU Shares is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable withholding
taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes the Firm
deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to you. In
addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its sole
discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion of
any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you or
the Firm in connection with the grant, Vesting or delivery of this Award by
requiring you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or through
payroll deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from the
Firm's executing a sale of RSU Shares delivered to you under this Award. In no
event, however, does this Paragraph [12]
 give you any discretion to
determine or affect the timing of the delivery of RSU Shares or the timing of
payment of tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property Instead of RSU Shares. In
accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole discretion of the
Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the RSU Shares, the Firm may
deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan or other property,
and all references in this Award Agreement to deliveries of RSU Shares will
include such deliveries of cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan
or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. RSUs that become
Vested on a Vesting Date[,] [and] RSU Shares that become deliverable on a
Delivery Date [and RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions] may, in each
case, be rounded to avoid fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your RSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party to any
shareholders' agreement to which other similarly situated employees ( e.g.,
employees with a similar title or position) of the Firm are required to be a
party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Restricted RSU Shares.
GS Inc. may affix to Certificates representing RSU Shares any legend that the
Committee determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any
restrictions to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc.
may advise the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended RSU
Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in RSU Shares and hedging or pledging RSU Shares and equity-based compensation
or other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with
Respect to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards"
or any successor policies), and confidential or proprietary

information, and you will effect sales of RSU Shares in accordance with such
rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time (which may include,
without limitation, restrictions relating to the timing of sale requests, the
manner in which sales are executed, pricing method, consolidation or
aggregation of orders and volume limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your RSUs, including those related to the sale of RSU Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery of, or Sell, RSU Shares. You will be deemed
to have represented and certified that you have complied with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement when RSU Shares are delivered to you and
[you receive payment in respect of Dividend Equivalent Rights] [when you
request the sale of RSU Shares following the release of Transfer
Restrictions];

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate, and the delivery
of RSU Shares [(including Shares at Risk)]or the payment of cash (including
dividends [and payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights]) or other property
may initially be made into and held in that escrow account until such time as
the Committee has received such documentation as it may have requested or
until the Committee has determined that any other conditions or restrictions
on delivery of RSU Shares, cash or other property required by this Award
Agreement have been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold RSUs [or Shares at Risk], from time to time, you
may be required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the
terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraph
(iv). You understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the
Firm at the time any certification is required will be deemed to be your
current address, (B) it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of any
changes to your address to ensure timely receipt of the certification
materials, (C) you are responsible for contacting the Firm to obtain such
certification materials if not received and (D) your failure to return
properly completed certification materials by the specified deadline (which
includes your failure to timely return the completed certification because you
did not provide the Firm with updated contact information) will result in the
forfeiture of all of your RSUs [and Shares at Risk] and subject previously
delivered amounts to repayment under Paragraph [8]
(iv);

(vii) [You Authorize the Firm to Register, in Its or Its Designee's Name, Any
Shares at Risk and Sell, Assign or Transfer Any Forfeited Shares at Risk. You
are granting to the Firm the full power and authority to register any Shares
at Risk in its or its designee's name and authorizing the Firm or its designee
to sell, assign or transfer any Shares at Risk if you forfeit your Shares at
Risk;]

(viii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee, the SIP Committee or SIP
Administrators. If you disagree with a determination made by the Committee,
the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of their delegates or
designees and you wish to appeal such determination,

you must submit a written request to the SIP Committee for review within 180
days after the determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal
administrative remedies ( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution
of that appeal) before seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration
pursuant to Paragraph [15][16] and Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(ix) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition to
and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of the
Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to you
or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or any
other Award.

14. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph [13][14] or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph [13][14] or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void.
The Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
RSUs may transfer some or all of their RSUs [and/or Shares at Risk (which will
continue to be subject to Transfer Restrictions until the applicable
Transferability Date)] through a gift for no consideration to any immediate
family member, a trust or other estate planning vehicle approved by the
Committee or SIP Committee in which the recipient and/or the recipient's
immediate family members in the aggregate have 100% of the beneficial
interest.

15. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph
[17(h)][18(f)], the obligation to deliver RSU Shares [or to make payments
under Dividend Equivalent Rights] [to pay dividends or to remove Transfer
Restrictions] under this Award Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the
Plan, which provides for the Firm's right to offset against such obligation
any outstanding amounts you owe to the Firm and any amounts the Committee
deems appropriate pursuant to any tax equalization policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

16. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN SECTION
3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE
EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT
ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND YOU ARISING OUT OF OR
RELATING TO OR CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY
SETTLED BY ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET
FORTH IN SECTION 3.17 OF THE PLAN; PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE
YOU FROM FILING A CHARGE WITH OR PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR
PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO THE SEC, THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE OR LOCAL
HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCY, AS WELL AS LAW ENFORCEMENT.

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
([vii][viii]).

17. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

18. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph [17][18] apply to you only if
you are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph [17][18] and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this
Paragraph [17][18] will govern.

(b) Delivery of RSU Shares will not be delayed beyond the date on which all
applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares required by
this Agreement (including those specified in Paragraphs 6, [7,] 10
(a)(ii),
, 11([b][c])[, 12(b)] and [12][13] and the consents and other items
specified in Section 3.3 of the Plan) are satisfied. To the extent that any
portion of this Award is intended to satisfy the requirements for short-term
deferral treatment under Section 409A, delivery for such portion will occur by
the March 15 coinciding with the last day of the applicable "short-term
deferral" period described in Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for the delivery of
RSU Shares to be within the short-term deferral exception unless, in order to
permit all applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery to be satisfied,
the Committee elects, pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as
may be permitted in accordance with Section 409A, to delay delivery of RSU
Shares to a later date within the same calendar year or to such later date as
may be permitted under Section 409A, including Reg. 1.409A-3(d). For the
avoidance of doubt, if the Award includes a "series of installment payments"
as described in

Reg. 1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii), your right to the series of installment payments
will be treated as a right to a series of separate payments and not as a right
to a single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph [12]
 and Section
1.3.2(i) of the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any
securities, other Awards or other property that the Firm may deliver in
respect of your RSUs will not have the effect of deferring delivery or
payment, income inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture, beyond the
date on which such delivery, payment or inclusion would occur or such risk of
forfeiture would lapse, with respect to the RSU Shares that would otherwise
have been deliverable (unless the Committee elects a later date for this
purpose pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted
under Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the subsequent
election provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg.
1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Notwithstanding the timing provisions of Paragraph [11]
, the
delivery of RSU Shares referred to therein will be made after the date of
death and during the calendar year that includes the date of death (or on such
later date as may be permitted under Section 409A).

(e) The timing of delivery or payment pursuant to Paragraph [11]
 will
occur on the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within
the calendar year in which the termination of Employment occurs; provided ,
however , that, if you are a "specified employee" (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(i)(B) of the Code), delivery will occur on
the earlier of the Delivery Date or (to the extent required to avoid the
imposition of additional tax under Section 409A) the date that is six months
after your termination of Employment (or, if the latter date is not during a
Window Period, the first trading day of the next Window Period). For purposes
of Paragraph [11]
, references in this Award Agreement to termination of
Employment mean a termination of Employment from the Firm (as defined by the
Firm) which is also a separation from service (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A).

(f) [Notwithstanding any provision of Paragraph 7 or Section 2.8.2 of the Plan
to the contrary, the Dividend Equivalent Rights with respect to each of your
Outstanding RSUs will be paid to you within the calendar year that includes
the date of distribution of any corresponding regular cash dividends paid by
GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock the record date for which occurs
on or after the Date of Grant. The payment will be in an amount (less
applicable withholding) equal to such regular dividend payment as would have
been made in respect of the RSU Shares underlying such Outstanding RSUs.]

(g) [The timing of delivery or payment referred to in Paragraph 11(b)(i) will
be the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the Committee receives satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment, provided that such delivery or
payment will be made, and any Committee action referred to in Paragraph
11(b)(ii) will be taken, only at such time as, and if and to the extent that
it, as reasonably determined by the Firm, would not result in the imposition
of any additional tax to you under Section 409A.]

(h) Paragraph [14][15] and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards
that are 409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under
Section 409A.

(i) Delivery of RSU Shares in respect of any Award may be made, if and to the
extent elected by the Committee, later than the Delivery Date or other date or
period specified

hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award that constitutes 409A Deferred
Compensation, only to the extent that the later delivery is permitted under
Section 409A).

(j) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

19. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply[,] [and] to limit the forfeitures and
repayments that result under Paragraphs [8 and 9] [9 and 10 and to remove
Transfer Restrictions before the applicable Transferability Date]. In
addition, the Committee, in its sole discretion, may determine whether
Paragraph[s] [10(a)(ii)] [and] [10]
 will apply upon a termination of
Employment[ and whether a termination of Employment constitutes an Approved
Termination under Paragraph 10(c)].

20. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax consequences of this Award or the timing of delivery of RSU Shares will
not be an amendment that materially adversely affects your rights and
obligations under this Award Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement
will be in writing.

21. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

22. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the
forfeiture and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 8 and 9) or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority includes federal, state and local
government agencies such as the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission and any state or local human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York
State Division of Human Rights, the New York City Commission on Human Rights,
the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law
enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

[ U.K. M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend vesting of Outstanding RSUs, delivery of RSU
Shares or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any RSU Shares or
dividends into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c)
apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any
investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under
this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Loss Event" (as defined below)
or "Risk Event" (as defined below) and the extent to which: (1) you
participated in the Loss Event or Risk Event, (2) your compensation for
[] may or may not have been adjusted to take into
account the risk associated with the Loss Event, Risk Event, your "Serious
Misconduct" (as defined below) or the Serious Misconduct of a "Supervised
Employee" (as defined below) and (3) your compensation may be adjusted for the
year in which the Loss Event, Risk Event, your Serious Misconduct or a
Supervised Employee's Serious Misconduct is discovered.

(a) A Loss Event Occurs Prior to Delivery. If a Loss Event occurs prior to
the delivery of RSU Shares, your rights in respect of all or a portion of your
RSUs (whether or not Vested) which are scheduled to deliver on the next
Delivery Date immediately following the date that the Loss Event is identified
(or, if not practicable, then the next following Delivery Date) will
terminate, and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(i) A " Loss Event " means (A) an annual pre-tax loss at GS Inc. or (B)
annual negative revenues in one or more reporting segments as disclosed in the
Firm's Form 10-K other than the Asset Management segment, or annual negative
revenues in the Asset Management segment of $5 billion or more, provided in
either case that you are employed in a business within such reporting segment.

(b) A Risk Event Occurs []. If a Risk Event occurs
[], (i) your rights in respect of all or a portion of
your RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate and no RSU Shares will be
delivered in respect of such RSUs, (ii) your rights to all or a portion of any
Shares at Risk will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be cancelled and
(iii) you will be obligated immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm
an amount not in excess of the greater of the Fair Market Value of the RSU
Shares (plus any dividend payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without
reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other
obligations) determined as of (A) the date the Risk Event occurred and (B) the
date that the repayment request is made.

(i) A " Risk Event " means there occurs a loss of 5% or more of firmwide
total capital from a reportable operational risk event determined in
accordance with the firmwide Reporting Operational Risk Events Policy.

(c) You Engage in Serious Misconduct []. If you
engage in Serious Misconduct during [], you
will be obligated immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount
not in excess of the

greater of the Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend
payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount
applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations) determined as of (i)
the date the Serious Misconduct occurred and (ii) the date that the repayment
request is made.

(i) " Serious Misconduct " means that you engage in conduct that the Firm
reasonably considers, in its sole discretion, to be misconduct sufficient to
justify summary termination of employment under English law.

(d) A Supervised Employee Engages in Serious Misconduct. If the Committee
determines that it is appropriate to hold you accountable in whole or in part
for Serious Misconduct related to compliance, control or risk that occurred
during [] by a Supervised Employee, your rights in respect
of all or a portion of your RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate and no
RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs and your rights to all or
a portion of any Shares at Risk will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be
cancelled.

(i) " Supervised Employee " means an individual with respect to whom the
Committee determines you had supervisory responsibility as a result of direct
or indirect reporting lines or your management responsibility for an office,
division or business.

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Appendix (including your refusal to
remit payment) the parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with
Paragraph 16 of this Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole
means of resolution of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the
payment amount).]

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) [" Approved Termination " means that you are classified by the Firm as a
"fixed-term employee" and you (i) successfully complete the fixed-term
engagement, as determined by the Firm in its sole discretion, including
remaining Employed through the completion date specified by the Firm, and (ii)
terminate Employment immediately after the completion date without any "stay-
on" or other agreement or understanding to continue Employment with the Firm.
If you agree to stay with the Firm as an employee after your fixed-term
engagement ends and then later terminate Employment, you will not have an
Approved Termination.]

(c) " Associate With a Covered Enterprise " means that you (i) form, or
acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit participation
interest in, any Covered Enterprise or (ii) associate in any capacity
(including association as an officer, employee, partner, director, consultant,
agent or advisor) with any Covered Enterprise. Associate With a Covered
Enterprise may include, as determined in the discretion of either the
Committee or the SIP Committee, (i) becoming the subject of any publicly
available announcement or report of a pending or future association with a
Covered Enterprise and (ii) unpaid associations, including an association in
contemplation of future employment. "Association With a Covered Enterprise"
will have its correlative meaning.

(d) [" Conflicted Employment " means your employment at any U.S. Federal,
state or local government, any non-U.S. government, any supranational or
international organization, any self-regulatory organization, or any agency or
instrumentality of any such government or organization, or any other employer
(other than an "Accounting Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of
Regulation S-X or any successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a
result of such employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs
would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest.]

(e) " Covered Enterprise " means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or that the Firm
reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages in,
holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any
other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage
("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities include any
activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage,
irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in furtherance of an
advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be

expected to offer any product or service, or engages in, holds itself out as
engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any activity, in any
case, associated with investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than you or
your family members (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any type of
proprietary investing or trading); private wealth management; private banking;
consumer or commercial cash management; consumer, digital or commercial
banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge fund management;
insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property management; or
securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency or digital
asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or trading. An
enterprise that offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be
expected to offer Firm Products or Services, or engages in, holds itself out
as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities is a
Covered Enterprise , irrespective of whether the enterprise is a customer,
client or counterparty of the Firm or is otherwise associated with the Firm
and, because the Firm is a global enterprise, irrespective of where the
Covered Enterprise is physically located.

(f) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(g) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(h) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

(i) " Selected Firm Personnel " means any individual who is or in the three
months preceding the conduct prohibited by Paragraph [8]
[(i)] was (i) a
Firm employee or consultant with whom you personally worked while employed by
the Firm, (ii) a Firm employee or consultant who, at any time during the year
preceding the date of the termination of your Employment, worked in the same
division in which you worked or (iii) an Advisory Director, a Managing
Director or a Senior Advisor of the Firm.

(j) [" Shares at Risk " means RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions.]

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan.

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the "Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable,
the ultimate parent entity that directly or indirectly has beneficial

ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such
Rule is in effect on the date of the adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more
of the total voting power (in respect of the election of directors, or similar
officials in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the Surviving
Entity (the "Parent Entity") is represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS
Inc. Securities") that were outstanding immediately prior to such
Reorganization or Sale (or, if applicable, is represented by shares into which
such GS Inc. Securities were converted pursuant to such Reorganization or
Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the members of the board of directors (or
similar officials in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the
Parent Entity (or, if there is no Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity)
following the consummation of the Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of
the Board's approval of the execution of the initial agreement providing for
such Reorganization or Sale, individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who
either (A) were members of the Board on the Effective Date or (B) became
directors subsequent to the Effective Date and whose election or nomination
for election was approved by a vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent
Directors then on the Board (either by a specific vote or by approval of GS
Inc.'s proxy statement in which such persons are named as nominees for
director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Competitive Enterprise " means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity; (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in any entity that engages in any activity or
(iii) is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned by, or a significant
interest in which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned or controlled
by, any entity that engages in any activity that, in any case, competes or
will compete anywhere with any activity in which the Firm is engaged. The
activities covered by this definition include, without limitation: financial
services such as investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than the
Grantee and members of the Grantee's family (including for the avoidance of
doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading); private wealth
management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash management; consumer,
digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge
fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property
management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency
or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or
trading.

(n) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(o) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(p) " Delivery Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a delivery date, provided , unless the Committee determines
otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if such date is not during
a Window Period, the first trading day of the first Window Period beginning
after such date.

(q) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(r) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 of the Plan.

(s) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(t) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(u) " Extended Absence " means the Grantee's inability to perform for six
(6) continuous months, due to illness, injury or pregnancy-related
complications, substantially all the essential duties of the Grantee's
occupation, as determined by the Committee.

(v) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(w) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(x) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(y) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(z) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP.

(aa) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been
forfeited, cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the
shares of Common Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered
or other payments made.

(bb) [" Restricted Share " means a share of Common Stock delivered under the
Plan that is subject to Transfer Restrictions, forfeiture provisions and/or
other terms and conditions specified herein and in the Restricted Share Award
Agreement or other applicable Award Agreement. All references to Restricted
Shares include "Shares at Risk."]

(cc) [" Retirement " means termination of the Grantee's Employment (other
than for Cause) on or after the Date of Grant at a time when (i) (A) the sum
of the Grantee's age plus years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) equals or exceeds 60 and (B) the Grantee has
completed at least 10 years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) or, if earlier, (ii) (A) the Grantee has
attained age 50 and (B) the Grantee has completed at least five years of
service with the Firm (as determined by the Committee in its sole
discretion).]

(dd) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(ee) " RSU Shares " means shares of Common Stock that underlie an RSU.

(ff) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(gg) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(hh) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(ii) " Solicit " means any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(jj) " Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.

(kk) [" Transferability Date " means the date Transfer Restrictions on a
Restricted Share will be released. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date, GS Inc. shall take, or shall cause to be
taken, such steps as may be necessary to remove the Transfer Restrictions.]

(ll) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain

Outstanding. The fact that an Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise
indicate that the Grantee has an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such
Award, and such Award shall remain subject to such terms, conditions and
forfeiture provisions as may be provided for in the Plan or in the Award
Agreement.

(mm) " Vesting Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a date on which part or all of an Award becomes Vested.

(nn) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which
all employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common
Stock ( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.41 6 d192225dex1041.htm EX-10.41  EX-10.41

Exhibit 10.41

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

Y EAR-END RSU AWARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your  year-end award of
RSUs (your "Award"). You should read carefully this entire Award Agreement,
which includes the Award Statement, any attached Appendix and the signature
card. 

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph 16.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
number of RSUs awarded to you and any applicable Vesting Dates, Delivery Dates
and Transferability Dates.

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR RSUS 

5. Vesting . On each Vesting Date listed on your Award Statement,
you will become Vested in the amount of Outstanding RSUs listed next to that
date. When an RSU becomes Vested, it means only that your continued active
Employment is not required for delivery of that portion of RSU Shares.
Vesting does not mean you have a non-forfeitable right to the Vested portion
of your Award. The terms of this Award Agreement (including conditions to
delivery and any applicable Transfer Restrictions) continue to apply to Vested
RSUs, and you can still forfeit Vested RSUs and any RSU Shares.

D ELIVERY OF YOUR RSU SHARES 

6. Delivery . Reasonably promptly (but no more than 30 Business
Days) after each Delivery Date listed on your Award Statement, RSU Shares
(less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph 13(a)) will be
delivered (by book entry credit to your Account) in respect of the amount of
Outstanding RSUs listed next to that date. The Committee or the SIP Committee
may select multiple dates within the 30-Business-Day period following the
Delivery Date to deliver RSU Shares in respect of all or a portion of the RSUs
with the same Delivery Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such dates
will be treated as a single Delivery Date for purposes of this Award. Until
such delivery, you have only the rights of a general unsecured creditor, and
no rights as a shareholder of GS Inc. Without limiting the Committee's
authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the Firm may accelerate any
Delivery Date by up to 30 days.

T RANSFER RESTRICTIONS FOLLOWING DELIVERY 

7. Transfer Restrictions and Shares at Risk .  percent of the
RSU Shares that are delivered on any date will be Shares at Risk subject to
Transfer Restrictions until the [applicable] Transferability Date [listed on
your Award Statement]. Any purported sale, exchange, transfer, assignment,
pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization, hedge or other disposition in
violation of the Transfer Restrictions on Shares at Risk will be void. Within
30 Business Days after the Transferability Date listed on your Award Statement
(or any other date on which the Transfer Restrictions are to be removed), GS
Inc. will remove the Transfer Restrictions. The Committee or the SIP Committee
may select multiple dates within such 30-Business-Day period on which to
remove Transfer Restrictions for all or a portion of the Shares at Risk with
the same Transferability Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such
dates will be treated as a single Transferability Date for purposes of this
Award.

D IVIDENDS 

8. Dividend Equivalent Rights and Dividends . Each RSU includes a
Dividend Equivalent Right, which entitles you to receive an amount (less
applicable withholding), at or after the time of distribution of any regular
cash dividend paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock, equal to
any regular cash dividend payment that would have been made in respect of an
RSU Share underlying your Outstanding RSUs for any record date that occurs on
or after the Date of Grant. In addition, you will be entitled to receive on a
current basis any regular cash dividend paid in respect of your Shares at
Risk.

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

9. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph 9 sets forth the
events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk
and may require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously
delivered or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10.
More than one event may apply, and in no case will the occurrence of one event
limit the forfeiture and repayment obligations as a result of the occurrence
of any other event. In addition, the Firm reserves the right to (a) suspend
vesting of Outstanding RSUs, payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights,
delivery of RSU Shares or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any
RSU Shares, dividends or payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights into an
escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer
Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any investigation of whether
any of the events that result in forfeiture under the Plan or this Paragraph 9
have occurred. Paragraph 11 (relating to certain circumstances under which you
will not forfeit your unvested RSUs upon Employment termination) and Paragraph
12 (relating to certain circumstances under which vesting, delivery and/or
release of Transfer Restrictions may be accelerated) provide for exceptions to
one or more provisions of this Paragraph 9.

(a) Unvested RSUs Forfeited if Your Employment Terminates. If your
Employment terminates for any reason or you are otherwise no longer actively
Employed with the Firm (which includes off-premises notice periods, "garden
leaves," pay in lieu of notice or any other similar status), your rights to
your Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested will terminate, and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(b) Vested and Unvested RSUs Forfeited Upon Certain Events. If any of the
following occurs before the applicable Delivery Date, your rights to all of
your Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate, and no RSU
Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs:

(i) You Solicit Clients or Employees, Interfere with Client or Employee
Relationships or Participate in the Hiring of Employees :

(A) you, in any manner, directly or indirectly, (1) Solicit any Client to
transact business with a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain from doing
any business with the Firm, (2) interfere with or damage (or attempt to
interfere with or damage) any relationship between the Firm and any Client,
(3) Solicit any person who is an employee of the Firm to resign from the Firm,
(4) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or accept employment (or
other association) with any person or entity other than the Firm or (5)
participate in the hiring of any Selected Firm Personnel by any person or
entity other than the Firm (including, without limitation, participating in
the identification of individuals for potential hire, and participating in any
hiring decision), whether as an employee or consultant or otherwise, or

(B) Selected Firm Personnel are Solicited, hired or accepted into partnership,
membership or similar status by any entity where you have, or will have,
direct or indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm Personnel.

(ii) [ GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. GS Inc.
fails to maintain the required "Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio" as defined under
Federal Reserve Board Regulations applicable to GS Inc. for a period of 90
consecutive business days.]

(iii) [ GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. The Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the "FDIC")
makes a written recommendation under Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority)
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for the
appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of GS Inc. based on a determination that
GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of default."]

(c) Vested and Unvested RSUs and Shares at Risk Forfeited upon Certain
Events. If any of the following occurs (i) your rights to all of your
Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate, and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs and (ii) your rights to all of your
Shares at Risk will terminate and your Shares at Risk will be cancelled, in
each case, as may be further described below:

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause has
occurred before the applicable Delivery Date for RSUs or the Transferability
Date for Shares at Risk.

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the applicable Delivery Date for RSUs or the Transferability Date
for Shares at Risk, you failed to meet, in any respect, any obligation under
any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement entered into in connection with
your Employment or this Award, including the Firm's notice period requirement
applicable to you, any offer letter, employment agreement or any shareholders'
agreement relating to the Firm. Your failure to pay or reimburse the Firm, on
demand, for any amount you owe to the Firm will constitute (A) failure to meet
an obligation you have under an agreement, regardless of whether such
obligation arises under a written agreement, and/or (B) a material violation
of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 16 or Section 3.17 of the Plan,
or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted your
internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(viii).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Outstanding RSUs or Shares at Risk;
provided , however , that your rights will only be terminated in respect
of the RSUs and Shares at Risk that are replaced, substituted for or otherwise
considered by such other entity in making its grant.

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

10. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award . If the Committee
determines that any term of this Award was not satisfied, you will be
required, immediately upon demand therefor, to repay to the Firm the
following:

(a) Any RSU Shares (which, for the avoidance of doubt, includes any Shares at
Risk) for which the terms (including the terms for delivery) of the related
RSUs were not satisfied, in accordance with Section 2.6.3 of the Plan.

(b) Any Shares at Risk for which the terms (including the terms for the
release of Transfer Restrictions) were not satisfied, in accordance with
Section 2.5.3 of the Plan.

(c) Any RSU Shares that were delivered (but not subject to Transfer
Restrictions) at the same time any Shares at Risk that are cancelled or
required to be repaid were delivered.

(d) Any payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights for which the terms were not
satisfied (including any such payments made in respect of RSUs that are
forfeited or RSU Shares that are cancelled or required to be repaid), in
accordance with Section 2.8.3 of the Plan.

(e) Any dividends paid in respect of any RSU Shares that are cancelled or
required to be repaid.

(f) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any RSUs, RSU Shares, dividend payments and payments under Dividend
Equivalent Rights that are forfeited or required to be repaid.

E XCEPTIONS TO THE VESTING, DELIVERY AND/OR TRANSFERABILITY DATES 

11. Circumstances Under Which You Will Not Forfeit Your Unvested RSUs on
Employment Termination (but the Original Delivery Date and Transferability
Date Continue to Apply) . If your Employment terminates at a time when
you meet the requirements for Extended Absence, Retirement[,][or] "downsizing"
[or Approved Termination], each as described below, then Paragraph 9(a)

will not apply, and your Outstanding RSUs will be treated as described in this
Paragraph 11. All other terms of this Award Agreement, including the other
forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.

(a) Extended Absence or Retirement and No Association With a Covered
Enterprise.

(i) Generally. If your Employment terminates by Extended Absence or
Retirement, your Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested will become Vested.
However, your rights to any Outstanding RSU that becomes Vested by this
Paragraph 11(a)(i) will terminate and no RSU Share will be delivered in
respect of that RSU if you Associate With a Covered Enterprise on or before
the originally scheduled Vesting Date for that RSU.

(ii) Special Treatment for Involuntary or Mutual Agreement Termination. The
second sentence of Paragraph 11(a)(i) (relating to forfeiture if you Associate
With a Covered Enterprise) will not apply if (A) the Firm characterizes your
Employment termination as "involuntary" or by "mutual agreement" (and, in each
case, you have not engaged in conduct constituting Cause) and (B) you execute
a general waiver and release of claims and an agreement to pay any associated
tax liability, in each case, in the form the Firm prescribes. No Employment
termination that you initiate, including any purported "constructive
termination," a "termination for good reason" or similar concepts, can be
"involuntary" or by "mutual agreement."

(b) Downsizing. If (i) the Firm terminates your Employment solely by reason
of a "downsizing" (and you have not engaged in conduct constituting Cause) and
(ii) you execute a general waiver and release of claims and an agreement to
pay any associated tax liability, in each case, in the form the Firm
prescribes, your Outstanding RSUs that are not yet Vested will become Vested.
Whether or not your Employment is terminated solely by reason of a
"downsizing" will be determined by the Firm in its sole discretion.

(c) [ Approved Terminations of Fixed-Term Employees. If the Firm classifies
you as a "fixed-term" employee and your Employment terminates solely by reason
of an Approved Termination (and you have not engaged in conduct constituting
Cause), your Outstanding RSUs that are not yet Vested will become Vested.]

12. Accelerated Vesting, Delivery and/or Release of Transfer Restrictions
in the Event of a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control, Conflicted
Employment or Death . In the event of your Qualifying Termination After
a Change in Control, Conflicted Employment or death, each as described below,
then Paragraph 9(a) will not apply, your Outstanding RSUs and Shares at Risk
will be treated as described in this Paragraph 12, and, except as set forth in
Paragraph 12(a), all other terms of this Award Agreement, including the other
forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a Change in Control, the RSU Shares underlying your
Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will be delivered, and any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply. In addition, the forfeiture events in
Paragraph 9 will not apply to your Award.

(b) You Are Determined to Have Accepted Conflicted Employment.

(i) Generally. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan or
otherwise, for purposes of this Award Agreement, "Conflicted Employment" means
your

employment at any U.S. Federal, state or local government, any non-U.S.
government, any supranational or international organization, any self-
regulatory organization, or any agency or instrumentality of any such
government or organization, or any other employer (other than an "Accounting
Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of Regulation S-X or any
successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a result of such
employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs and Shares at Risk
would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest. Unless prohibited
by applicable law or regulation, the following will apply as soon as
practicable after the Committee has received satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment.

(A) Vesting. If your Employment terminates solely because you resign to
accept Conflicted Employment and you have completed at least three years of
continuous service with the Firm, your Outstanding RSUs will Vest; otherwise,
you will forfeit any Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested in accordance with
Paragraph 9(a).

(B) Delivery and Release of Transfer Restrictions. If your Employment
terminates solely because you resign to accept Conflicted Employment or if,
following your termination of Employment, you notify the Firm that you are
accepting Conflicted Employment, RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of
your Outstanding Vested RSUs (including in the form of cash as described in
Paragraph 13(b)) and any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply.

(ii) You May Have to Take Other Steps to Address Conflicts of Interest. The
Committee retains the authority to exercise its rights under the Award
Agreement or the Plan (including Section 1.3.2 of the Plan) to take or require
you to take other steps it determines in its sole discretion to be necessary
or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest (which may
include a determination that the accelerated vesting, delivery and/or release
of Transfer Restrictions described in Paragraph 12(b)(i) will not apply
because such actions are not necessary or appropriate to cure an actual or
perceived conflict of interest).

(c) Death. If you die, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding RSUs
(whether or not Vested) will be delivered to the representative of your estate
and any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply as soon as practicable after
the date of death and after such documentation as may be requested by the
Committee is provided to the Committee.

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

13. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
RSU Shares is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable withholding
taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes the Firm
deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to you. In
addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its sole
discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion of
any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you or
the Firm in connection with the grant, Vesting or delivery of this Award by
requiring you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or through
payroll deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from the
Firm's executing a sale of RSU Shares delivered to you under this Award. In no
event, however, does this Paragraph 13(a) give you any discretion to determine
or affect the timing of the delivery of RSU Shares or the timing of payment of
tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property Instead of RSU Shares. In
accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole discretion of the
Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the RSU Shares, the Firm may
deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan or other property,
and all references in this Award Agreement to deliveries of RSU Shares will
include such deliveries of cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan
or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. RSUs that become
Vested on a Vesting Date, RSU Shares that become deliverable on a Delivery
Date and RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions may, in each case, be
rounded to avoid fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your RSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party to any
shareholders' agreement to which other similarly situated employees ( e.g.,
employees with a similar title or position) of the Firm are required to be a
party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Restricted RSU Shares.
GS Inc. may affix to Certificates representing RSU Shares any legend that the
Committee determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any
restrictions to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc.
may advise the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended RSU
Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in RSU Shares and hedging or pledging RSU Shares and equity-based compensation
or other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with
Respect to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards"
or any successor policies), and confidential or proprietary information, and
you will effect sales of RSU Shares in accordance with such rules and
procedures as may be adopted from time to time (which may include, without
limitation, restrictions relating to the timing of sale requests, the manner
in which sales are executed, pricing method, consolidation or aggregation of
orders and volume limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your RSUs, including those related to the sale of RSU Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery of, or Sell, RSU Shares. You will be deemed
to have represented and certified that you have complied with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement when RSU Shares are delivered to you, you
receive payment in respect of Dividend Equivalent Rights and you request the
sale of RSU Shares following the release of Transfer Restrictions;

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate, and the delivery
of RSU Shares (including Shares at Risk) or the payment of cash (including
dividends and payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights) or other property may
initially be made into and held in that escrow account until such time as the
Committee has received such documentation as it may have requested or until
the Committee has determined that any other conditions or restrictions on
delivery of RSU Shares, cash or other property required by this Award
Agreement have been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold RSUs or Shares at Risk, from time to time, you may
be required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraph 9(c)(iv). You
understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the Firm at the time
any certification is required will be deemed to be your current address, (B)
it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of any changes to your address to
ensure timely receipt of the certification materials, (C) you are responsible
for contacting the Firm to obtain such certification materials if not received
and (D) your failure to return properly completed certification materials by
the specified deadline (which includes your failure to timely return the
completed certification because you did not provide the Firm with updated
contact information) will result in the forfeiture of all of your RSUs and
Shares at Risk and subject previously delivered amounts to repayment under
Paragraph 9(c)(iv);

(vii) You Authorize the Firm to Register, in Its or Its Designee's Name, Any
Shares at Risk and Sell, Assign or Transfer Any Forfeited Shares at Risk. You
are granting to the Firm the full power and authority to register any Shares
at Risk in its or its designee's name and authorizing the Firm or its designee
to sell, assign or transfer any Shares at Risk if you forfeit your Shares at
Risk;

(viii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee, the SIP Committee or SIP
Administrators. If you disagree with a determination made by the Committee,
the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of their delegates or
designees and you wish to appeal such determination, you must submit a written
request to the SIP Committee for review within 180 days after the
determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal administrative remedies
( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution of that appeal) before
seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration pursuant to Paragraph 16 and
Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(ix) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition to
and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of the
Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to you
or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or any
other Award.

14. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph 14 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph 14 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The
Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
RSUs may transfer some or all of their RSUs and/or Shares at Risk (which will
continue to be subject to Transfer Restrictions until the Transferability
Date) through a gift for no consideration to any immediate family member, a
trust or other estate planning vehicle approved by the

Committee or SIP Committee in which the recipient and/or the recipient's
immediate family members in the aggregate have 100% of the beneficial
interest.

15. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph 18(h), the
obligation to deliver RSU Shares, to pay dividends or payments under Dividend
Equivalent Rights or to remove the Transfer Restrictions under this Award
Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the Plan, which provides for the Firm's
right to offset against such obligation any outstanding amounts you owe to the
Firm and any amounts the Committee deems appropriate pursuant to any tax
equalization policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

16. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN SECTION
3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE
EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT
ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND YOU ARISING OUT OF OR
RELATING TO OR CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY
SETTLED BY ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET
FORTH IN SECTION 3.17 OF THE PLAN; PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE
YOU FROM FILING A CHARGE WITH OR PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR
PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO THE SEC, THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE OR LOCAL
HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCY, AS WELL AS LAW ENFORCEMENT. 

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
13(f)(viii).

17. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

18. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 18 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 18 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
18 will govern.

(b) Delivery of RSU Shares will not be delayed beyond the date on which all
applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares required by
this Agreement (including those specified in Paragraphs 6, 7, 11(a)(ii),
11(b), 12(c) and 13 and the consents and other items specified in Section 3.3
of the Plan) are satisfied. To the extent that any portion of this Award is
intended to satisfy the requirements for short-term deferral treatment under
Section 409A, delivery for such portion will occur by the March 15 coinciding
with the last day of the applicable "short-term deferral" period described in
Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for the delivery of RSU Shares to be within the
short-term deferral exception unless, in order to permit all applicable
conditions or restrictions on delivery to be satisfied, the Committee elects,
pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted in
accordance with Section 409A, to delay delivery of RSU Shares to a later date
within the same calendar year or to such later date as may be permitted under
Section 409A, including Reg. 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt, if the
Award includes a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg.
1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii), your right to the series of installment payments will be
treated as a right to a series of separate payments and not as a right to a
single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 13(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any securities,
other Awards or other property that the Firm may deliver in respect of your
RSUs will not have the effect of deferring delivery or payment, income
inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture, beyond the date on which such
delivery, payment or inclusion would occur or such risk of forfeiture would
lapse, with respect to the RSU Shares that would otherwise have been
deliverable (unless the Committee elects a later date for this purpose
pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted under
Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the subsequent election
provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. 1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Notwithstanding the timing provisions of Paragraph 12(c), the delivery of
RSU Shares referred to therein will be made after the date of death and during
the calendar year that includes the date of death (or on such later date as
may be permitted under Section 409A).

(e) The timing of delivery or payment pursuant to Paragraph 12(a) will occur
on the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the termination

of Employment occurs; provided , however , that, if you are a "specified
employee" (as defined by the Firm in accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(i)(B)
of the Code), delivery will occur on the earlier of the Delivery Date or (to
the extent required to avoid the imposition of additional tax under Section
409A) the date that is six months after your termination of Employment (or, if
the latter date is not during a Window Period, the first trading day of the
next Window Period). For purposes of Paragraph 12(a), references in this Award
Agreement to termination of Employment mean a termination of Employment from
the Firm (as defined by the Firm) which is also a separation from service (as
defined by the Firm in accordance with Section 409A).

(f) Notwithstanding any provision of Paragraph 8 or Section 2.8.2 of the Plan
to the contrary, the Dividend Equivalent Rights with respect to each of your
Outstanding RSUs will be paid to you within the calendar year that includes
the date of distribution of any corresponding regular cash dividends paid by
GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock the record date for which occurs
on or after the Date of Grant. The payment will be in an amount (less
applicable withholding) equal to such regular dividend payment as would have
been made in respect of the RSU Shares underlying such Outstanding RSUs.

(g) The timing of delivery or payment referred to in Paragraph 12(b)(i) will
be the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the Committee receives satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment, provided that such delivery or
payment will be made, and any Committee action referred to in Paragraph
12(b)(ii) will be taken, only at such time as, and if and to the extent that
it, as reasonably determined by the Firm, would not result in the imposition
of any additional tax to you under Section 409A.

(h) Paragraph 15 and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are
409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(i) Delivery of RSU Shares in respect of any Award may be made, if and to the
extent elected by the Committee, later than the Delivery Date or other date or
period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award that constitutes
409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later delivery is
permitted under Section 409A).

(j) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

19. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply, to limit the forfeitures and
repayments that result under Paragraphs 9 and 10 and to remove Transfer
Restrictions before the Transferability Date. In addition, the Committee, in
its sole discretion, may determine whether Paragraphs 11(a)(ii) and 11(b) will
apply upon a termination of Employment [and whether a termination of
Employment constitutes an Approved Termination under Paragraph 11(c)].

20. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax consequences of this

Award or the timing of delivery of RSU Shares will not be an amendment that
materially adversely affects your rights and obligations under this Award
Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement will be in writing.

21. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

22. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the
forfeiture and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 9 and 10) or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority includes federal, state and local
government agencies such as the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission and any state or local human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York
State Division of Human Rights, the New York City Commission on Human Rights,
the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law
enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) [" Approved Termination " means that you are classified by the Firm as a
"fixed-term employee" and you (i) successfully complete the fixed-term
engagement, as determined by the Firm in its sole discretion, including
remaining Employed through the completion date specified by the Firm, and (ii)
terminate Employment immediately after the completion date without any "stay-
on" or other agreement or understanding to continue Employment with the Firm.
If you agree to stay with the Firm as an employee after your fixed-term
engagement ends and then later terminate Employment, you will not have an
Approved Termination.]

(c) " Associate With a Covered Enterprise " means that you (i) form, or
acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit participation
interest in, any Covered Enterprise or (ii) associate in any capacity
(including association as an officer, employee, partner, director, consultant,
agent or advisor) with any Covered Enterprise. Associate With a Covered
Enterprise may include, as determined in the discretion of either the
Committee or the SIP Committee, (i) becoming the subject of any publicly
available announcement or report of a pending or future association with a
Covered Enterprise and (ii) unpaid associations, including an association in
contemplation of future employment. "Association With a Covered Enterprise"
will have its correlative meaning.

(d) " Conflicted Employment " means your employment at any U.S. Federal,
state or local government, any non-U.S. government, any supranational or
international organization, any self-regulatory organization, or any agency or
instrumentality of any such government or organization, or any other employer
(other than an "Accounting Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of
Regulation S-X or any successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a
result of such employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs and
Shares at Risk would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest.

(e) " Covered Enterprise " means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or that the Firm
reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages in,
holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any
other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage
("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities include any
activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage,
irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in furtherance of an
advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
any product or

service, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be
expected to engage in any activity, in any case, associated with investment
banking; public or private finance; lending; financial advisory services;
private investing for anyone other than you or your family members (including,
for the avoidance of doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading);
private wealth management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash
management; consumer, digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset,
portfolio or hedge fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or
brokerage; property management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy,
derivatives, currency or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody,
clearance, settlement or trading. An enterprise that offers, holds itself out
as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm Products or Services,
or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected
to engage in Firm Activities is a Covered Enterprise , irrespective of
whether the enterprise is a customer, client or counterparty of the Firm or is
otherwise associated with the Firm and, because the Firm is a global
enterprise, irrespective of where the Covered Enterprise is physically
located.

(f) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(g) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(h) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

(i) " Selected Firm Personnel " means any individual who is or in the three
months preceding the conduct prohibited by Paragraph 9(b)(i) was (i) a Firm
employee or consultant with whom you personally worked while employed by the
Firm, (ii) a Firm employee or consultant who, at any time during the year
preceding the date of the termination of your Employment, worked in the same
division in which you worked or (iii) an Advisory Director, a Managing
Director or a Senior Advisor of the Firm.

(j) " Shares at Risk " means RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan.

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the "Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable,
the ultimate parent entity that directly or indirectly has beneficial
ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such
Rule is in effect on the date of the

adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more of the total voting power (in respect
of the election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity
other than a corporation) of the Surviving Entity (the "Parent Entity") is
represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS Inc. Securities") that were
outstanding immediately prior to such Reorganization or Sale (or, if
applicable, is represented by shares into which such GS Inc. Securities were
converted pursuant to such Reorganization or Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the
members of the board of directors (or similar officials in the case of an
entity other than a corporation) of the Parent Entity (or, if there is no
Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity) following the consummation of the
Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of the Board's approval of the
execution of the initial agreement providing for such Reorganization or Sale,
individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who either (A) were members of the
Board on the Effective Date or (B) became directors subsequent to the
Effective Date and whose election or nomination for election was approved by a
vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent Directors then on the Board
(either by a specific vote or by approval of GS Inc.'s proxy statement in
which such persons are named as nominees for director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Competitive Enterprise " means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity; (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in any entity that engages in any activity or
(iii) is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned by, or a significant
interest in which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned or controlled
by, any entity that engages in any activity that, in any case, competes or
will compete anywhere with any activity in which the Firm is engaged. The
activities covered by this definition include, without limitation: financial
services such as investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than the
Grantee and members of the Grantee's family (including for the avoidance of
doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading); private wealth
management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash management; consumer,
digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge
fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property
management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency
or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or
trading.

(n) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(o) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(p) " Delivery Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a delivery date, provided , unless the Committee determines
otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if such date is not during
a Window Period, the first trading day of the first Window Period beginning
after such date.

(q) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(r) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 of the Plan.

(s) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(t) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(u) " Extended Absence " means the Grantee's inability to perform for six
(6) continuous months, due to illness, injury or pregnancy-related
complications, substantially all the essential duties of the Grantee's
occupation, as determined by the Committee.

(v) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(w) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(x) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(y) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(z) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP.

(aa) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been
forfeited, cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the
shares of Common Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered
or other payments made.

(bb) " Restricted Share " means a share of Common Stock delivered under the
Plan that is subject to Transfer Restrictions, forfeiture provisions and/or
other terms and conditions specified herein and in the Restricted Share Award
Agreement or other applicable Award Agreement. All references to Restricted
Shares include "Shares at Risk."

(cc) " Retirement " means termination of the Grantee's Employment (other
than for Cause) on or after the Date of Grant at a time when (i) (A) the sum
of the Grantee's age plus years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) equals or exceeds 60 and (B) the Grantee has
completed at least 10 years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) or, if earlier, (ii) (A) the Grantee has
attained age 50 and (B) the Grantee has completed at least five years of
service with the Firm (as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion).

(dd) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(ee) " RSU Shares " means shares of Common Stock that underlie an RSU.

(ff) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(gg) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(hh) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(ii) " Solicit " means any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(jj) " Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.

(kk) " Transferability Date " means the date Transfer Restrictions on a
Restricted Share will be released. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date, GS Inc. shall take, or shall cause to be
taken, such steps as may be necessary to remove Transfer Restrictions.

(ll) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain Outstanding. The fact that an
Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise indicate that the Grantee has
an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such Award, and such Award shall
remain subject to such terms, conditions and forfeiture provisions as may be
provided for in the Plan or in the Award Agreement.

(mm) " Vesting Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a date on which part or all of an Award becomes Vested.

(nn) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which
all employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common
Stock ( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.42 7 d192225dex1042.htm EX-10.42  EX-10.42

Exhibit 10.42

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

A WARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your  of
RSUs (your "Award"). You should read carefully this entire Award Agreement,
which includes the Award Statement, any attached Appendix and the signature
card.

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph 16.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
number of RSUs awarded to you and [any applicable][the] Delivery Date[s] and
Transferability Date[s]. [The portion of your RSUs that are designated on the
Award Statement as " Year-End Base RSUs" are referred to in this Award
Agreement as "Base RSUs." The portion of your RSUs that are designated on the
Award Statement as " Year-End Additional Base RSUs" are referred to in
this Award Agreement as "Additional Base RSUs." The portion of your RSUs that
are designated on the Award Statement as " Year-End Supplemental RSUs" are
referred to in this Award Agreement as "Supplemental RSUs." All references to
RSUs in this Award Agreement include the Base RSUs, the Additional Base RSUs
and the Supplemental RSUs.]

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR RSUS 

5. Vesting . All of your RSUs are Vested. When an RSU is Vested, it
means only that your continued active Employment is not required for
delivery of that portion of RSU Shares. Vesting does not mean you have a
non-forfeitable right to the Vested portion of your Award. The terms of this
Award Agreement (including conditions to delivery and any applicable Transfer
Restrictions) continue to apply to Vested RSUs, and you can still forfeit
Vested RSUs and any RSU Shares.

D ELIVERY OF YOUR RSU SHARES 

6. Delivery . Reasonably promptly (but no more than 30 Business
Days) after [each][the] Delivery Date listed on your Award Statement, RSU
Shares (less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph 13(a)) will be
delivered (by book entry credit to your Account) [in respect of the amount of
Outstanding RSUs listed next to that date]. The Committee or the SIP Committee
may select multiple dates within the 30-Business-Day period following the
Delivery Date to deliver RSU Shares in respect of all or a portion of the RSUs
with the same Delivery Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such

dates will be treated as a single Delivery Date for purposes of this Award.
Until such delivery, you have only the rights of a general unsecured creditor,
and no rights as a shareholder of GS Inc. Without limiting the Committee's
authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the Firm may accelerate any
Delivery Date by up to 30 days.

T RANSFER RESTRICTIONS FOLLOWING DELIVERY 

7. Transfer Restrictions and Shares at Risk .

(a)  percent of the RSU Shares that are delivered on any date will be
Shares at Risk subject to Transfer Restrictions until the [applicable]
Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement].

(b) Purported Transactions that Violate the Transfer Restrictions Are Void.
Any purported sale, exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation,
fractionalization, hedge or other disposition in violation of the Transfer
Restrictions on Shares at Risk will be void.

(c) Removal of Transfer Restrictions. Within 30 Business Days after the
[applicable] Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement] (or any
other date on which the Transfer Restrictions are to be removed), GS Inc. will
remove the Transfer Restrictions. The Committee or the SIP Committee may
select multiple dates within such 30-Business-Day period on which to remove
Transfer Restrictions for all or a portion of the Shares at Risk with the same
Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement], and all such dates will
be treated as a single Transferability Date for purposes of this Award.

D IVIDENDS 

8. [  Dividend Equivalent Rights and] Dividends . [Each RSU
includes a Dividend Equivalent Right, which entitles you to receive an amount
(less applicable withholding), at or after the time of distribution of any
regular cash dividend paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock,
equal to any regular cash dividend payment that would have been made in
respect of an RSU Share underlying your Outstanding RSUs for any record date
that occurs on or after the Date of Grant. In addition,] [y][Y]ou will be
entitled to receive on a current basis any regular cash dividend paid in
respect of your Shares at Risk. [The RSUs do not include Dividend
Equivalent Rights.]

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

9. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph 9 sets forth the
events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk
and may require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously
delivered or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10.
More than one event may apply, and in no case will the occurrence of one event
limit the forfeiture and repayment obligations as a result of the occurrence
of any other event. In addition, the Firm reserves the right to (a) suspend
[payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights,] delivery of RSU Shares or release
of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any RSU Shares [or][,] dividends [or
payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights] into an escrow account in
accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any
RSU Shares in connection with any investigation of whether any of the events
that result in forfeiture under the Plan or this Paragraph 9 have occurred.
Paragraph 11 [(relating to certain circumstances under which restrictions on
Association With a Covered Enterprise will not apply) and Paragraph 12]
(relating to certain circumstances under which delivery and/or release of
Transfer Restrictions may be accelerated) provide for exceptions to one or
more provisions of this Paragraph 9. [[Each of] the [U.K. Material Risk Taker
Appendix] [and the] [GSBE Material Risk Taker Appendix]

supplements this Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that result in
forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk and may require
repayment to the Firm as described in Paragraph 10[and][,] the [U.K. Material
Risk Taker Appendix] [and the] [GSBE Material Risk Taker Appendix].]

(a) [RSUs Forfeited Upon Certain Events. If any of the following occurs
before the applicable Delivery Date, your rights to all of your Outstanding
RSUs will terminate, and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such
RSUs:

(i) GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. GS Inc.
fails to maintain the required "Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio" as defined under
Federal Reserve Board Regulations applicable to GS Inc. for a period of 90
consecutive business days.

(ii) GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. The Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the "FDIC")
makes a written recommendation under Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority)
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for the
appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of GS Inc. based on a determination that
GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of default."]

(b) RSUs [and Shares at Risk] Forfeited Upon Certain Events. If any of the
following occurs, [i] your rights to your Outstanding RSUs will terminate, and
no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs [and (ii) your rights
to all of your Shares at Risk will terminate and your Shares at Risk will be
cancelled, in each case], as may be further described below:

(i) You Associate With a Covered Enterprise.

(A) If you Associate With a Covered Enterprise before the earlier of
 or a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control, your
rights to % of your Outstanding RSUs will terminate, and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(ii) You Solicit Clients or Employees, Interfere with Client or Employee
Relationships or Participate in the Hiring of Employees. Before ,
either:

(A) you, in any manner, directly or indirectly, (1) Solicit any Client to
transact business with a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain from doing
any business with the Firm, (2) interfere with or damage (or attempt to
interfere with or damage) any relationship between the Firm and any Client,
(3) Solicit any person who is an employee of the Firm to resign from the Firm,
(4) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or accept employment (or
other association) with any person or entity other than the Firm or (5)
participate in the hiring of any Selected Firm Personnel by any person or
entity other than the Firm (including, without limitation, participating in
the identification of individuals for potential hire, and participating in any
hiring decision), whether as an employee or consultant or otherwise, or

(B) Selected Firm Personnel are Solicited, hired or accepted into partnership,
membership or similar status by any entity where you have, or will have,
direct or indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm Personnel,
unless the Committee determines that you were not involved in such
Solicitation, hiring or acceptance.

(iii) [ GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. Before
the applicable Delivery Date, GS Inc. fails to maintain the required "Minimum
Tier 1 Capital Ratio"

as defined under Federal Reserve Board Regulations applicable to GS Inc. for a
period of 90 consecutive business days.]

(iv) [ GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. Before the applicable
Delivery Date, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (the "FDIC") makes a written recommendation
under Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act for the appointment of the FDIC as a
receiver of GS Inc. based on a determination that GS Inc. is "in default" or
"in danger of default."]

(v) [ Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. GS Inc. is
required to prepare an accounting restatement due to GS Inc.'s material
noncompliance, as a result of misconduct, with any financial reporting
requirement under the securities laws as described in Section 304(a) of
Sarbanes-Oxley; provided , however , that your rights with respect to the
RSUs will only be terminated to the same extent that would be required under
Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief executive officer" or
"chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of whether you actually hold
such position at the relevant time).]

(c) [RSUs and Shares at Risk Forfeited upon Certain Events. If any of the
following occurs (i) your rights to all of your Outstanding RSUs will
terminate, and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs and
(ii) your rights to all of your Shares at Risk will terminate and your Shares
at Risk will be cancelled, in each case, as may be further described below:]

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before .

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before , you failed to meet, in any respect, any obligation
under any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement entered into in connection
with your Employment or this Award, including the Firm's notice period
requirement applicable to you, any offer letter, employment agreement or any
shareholders' agreement relating to the Firm. Your failure to pay or reimburse
the Firm, on demand, for any amount you owe to the Firm will constitute (A)
failure to meet an obligation you have under an agreement, regardless of
whether such obligation arises under a written agreement, and/or (B) a
material violation of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 16 or Section 3.17 of the Plan,
or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted your
internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(viii).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Outstanding RSUs or Shares at Risk;
provided , however , that your rights will only be terminated in respect
of the RSUs and Shares at Risk that are replaced, substituted for or otherwise
considered by such other entity in making its grant.

(viii) [ Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. GS Inc. is
required to prepare an accounting restatement due to GS Inc.'s material
noncompliance, as a result of misconduct, with any financial reporting
requirement under the securities laws as described in Section 304(a) of
Sarbanes-Oxley; provided , however , that your rights will only be
terminated in respect of the RSUs and Shares at Risk to the same extent that
would be required under Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief
executive officer" or "chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of
whether you actually hold such position at the relevant time).]

(ix) [GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. Prior to
the Transferability Date, GS Inc. fails to maintain the required "Minimum Tier
1 Capital Ratio" as defined under Federal Reserve Board Regulations applicable
to GS Inc. for a period of 90 consecutive business days.]

(x) [GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. Prior to the Transferability
Date, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (the "FDIC") makes a written recommendation under Title
II (Orderly Liquidation Authority) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act for the appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of GS
Inc. based on a determination that GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of
default."]

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

10. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award .

(a) [Repayment, Generally]. If the Committee determines that any term of
this Award was not satisfied, you will be required, immediately upon demand
therefor, to repay to the Firm the following:

(i) Any RSU Shares (which, for the avoidance of doubt, includes any Shares at
Risk) for which the terms (including the terms for delivery) of the related
RSUs were not satisfied, in accordance with Section 2.6.3 of the Plan.

(ii) Any Shares at Risk for which the terms (including the terms for the
release of Transfer Restrictions) were not satisfied, in accordance with
Section 2.5.3 of the Plan.

(iii) Any RSU Shares that were delivered (but not subject to Transfer
Restrictions) at the same time any Shares at Risk that are cancelled or
required to be repaid were delivered.

(iv) [Any payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights for which the terms were
not satisfied (including any such payments made in respect of RSUs that are
forfeited or RSU Shares that are cancelled or required to be repaid), in
accordance with Section 2.8.3 of the Plan.]

(v) Any dividends paid in respect of any RSU Shares that are cancelled or
required to be repaid.

(vi) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any RSUs, RSU Shares[ and][,] dividend payments [and payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights] that are forfeited or required to be repaid.

(b) [ Repayment Upon Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley.
If an event described in Paragraph 9(b)(viii) (relating to a requirement under
Sarbanes-Oxley that GS Inc. prepare an accounting restatement) occurs, any RSU
Shares, cash or other property delivered, paid or withheld in respect of this
Award will be subject to repayment as described in Paragraph 10(a) to the same
extent that would be required under Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you
been a "chief executive officer" or "chief financial officer" of GS Inc.
(regardless of whether you actually hold such position at the relevant time).]

[E XCEPTIONS TO ASSOCIATION WITH A COVERED ENTERPRISE,][ACCELERATED]
DELIVERY DATE[S] AND/OR TRANSFERABILITY DATE[S] 

11. [Restrictions on Association With a Covered Enterprise Cease to Apply
After an Involuntary or Mutual Agreement Termination (but the Original
Delivery Date and Transferability Date Continue to Apply) . Paragraph
9(a)(i) (relating to forfeiture if you Associate With a Covered Enterprise)
will not apply if (a) your Employment terminates and the Firm characterizes
your Employment termination as "involuntary" or by "mutual agreement" (and, in
each case, you have not engaged in conduct constituting Cause) and (b) you
execute a general waiver and release of claims and an agreement to pay any
associated tax liability, in each case, in the form the Firm prescribes. No
Employment termination that you initiate, including any purported
"constructive termination," a "termination for good reason" or similar
concepts, can be "involuntary" or by "mutual agreement." All other terms of
this Award Agreement, including the other forfeiture and repayment events in
Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.]

12. Accelerated Delivery and/or Release of Transfer Restrictions in the
Event of a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control, Conflicted
Employment or Death . In the event of your Qualifying Termination After
a Change in Control, Conflicted Employment or death, each as described below,
your Outstanding RSUs and Shares at Risk will be treated as described in this
Paragraph 12, and, except as set forth in Paragraph 12(a), all other terms of
this Award Agreement, including the other forfeiture and repayment events in
Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a Change in Control, the RSU Shares underlying your
Outstanding RSUs will be delivered, and any Transfer Restrictions will cease
to apply. In addition, the forfeiture events in Paragraph 9 will not apply to
your Award.

(b) You Are Determined to Have Accepted Conflicted Employment.

(i) Generally. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan or

otherwise, for purposes of this Award Agreement, "Conflicted Employment" means
your employment at any U.S. Federal, state or local government, any non-U.S.
government, any supranational or international organization, any self-
regulatory organization, or any agency or instrumentality of any such
government or organization, or any other employer (other than an "Accounting
Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of Regulation S-X or any
successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a result of such
employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs and Shares at Risk
would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest. Unless prohibited
by applicable law or regulation, if your Employment terminates solely because
you resign to accept Conflicted Employment or if, following your termination
of Employment, you notify the Firm that you are accepting Conflicted
Employment, RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of your Outstanding RSUs
(including in the form of cash as described in Paragraph 13(b)) and any
Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply as soon as practicable after the
Committee has received satisfactory documentation relating to your Conflicted
Employment.

(ii) You May Have to Take Other Steps to Address Conflicts of Interest. The
Committee retains the authority to exercise its rights under the Award
Agreement or the Plan (including Section 1.3.2 of the Plan) to take or require
you to take other steps it determines in its sole discretion to be necessary
or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest (which may
include a determination that the accelerated delivery and/or release of
Transfer Restrictions described in Paragraph 12(b)(i) will not apply because
such actions are not necessary or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived
conflict of interest).

(c) Death. If you die, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding RSUs will
be delivered to the representative of your estate and any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply as soon as practicable after the date of
death and after such documentation as may be requested by the Committee is
provided to the Committee.

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

13. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
RSU Shares is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable withholding
taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes the Firm
deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to you. In
addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its sole
discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion of
any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you or
the Firm in connection with the grant[, Vesting] or delivery of this Award by
requiring you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or through
payroll deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from the
Firm's executing a sale of RSU Shares delivered to you under this Award. In no
event, however, does this Paragraph 13(a) give you any discretion to determine
or affect the timing of the delivery of RSU Shares or the timing of payment of
tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property Instead of RSU Shares. In
accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole discretion of the
Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the RSU Shares, the Firm may
deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan or other property,
and all references in this Award Agreement to deliveries of RSU Shares will
include such deliveries of cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan
or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. RSU Shares that
become deliverable on a Delivery Date and RSU Shares subject to Transfer
Restrictions may, in each case, be rounded to avoid fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your RSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party to any
shareholders' agreement to which other similarly situated employees ( e.g.,
employees with a similar title or position) of the Firm are required to be a
party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Restricted RSU Shares.
GS Inc. may affix to Certificates representing RSU Shares any legend that the
Committee determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any
restrictions to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc.
may advise the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended RSU
Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in RSU Shares and hedging or pledging RSU Shares and equity-based compensation
or other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with
Respect to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards"
or any successor policies), and confidential or proprietary information, and
you will effect sales of RSU Shares in accordance with such rules and
procedures as may be adopted from time to time (which may include, without
limitation, restrictions relating to the timing of sale requests, the manner
in which sales are executed, pricing method, consolidation or aggregation of
orders and volume limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your RSUs, including those related to the sale of RSU Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery of, or Sell, RSU Shares. You will be deemed
to have represented and certified that you have complied with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement when RSU Shares are delivered to you[,
you receive payment in respect of Dividend Equivalent Rights] and you request
the sale of RSU Shares following the release of Transfer Restrictions;

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate, and the delivery
of RSU Shares (including Shares at Risk) or the payment of cash (including
dividends) [and payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights]) or other property
may initially be made into and held in that escrow account until such time as
the

Committee has received such documentation as it may have requested or until
the Committee has determined that any other conditions or restrictions on
delivery of RSU Shares, cash or other property required by this Award
Agreement have been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold RSUs or Shares at Risk, from time to time, you may
be required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraph 9(b)(iv). You
understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the Firm at the time
any certification is required will be deemed to be your current address, (B)
it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of any changes to your address to
ensure timely receipt of the certification materials, (C) you are responsible
for contacting the Firm to obtain such certification materials if not received
and (D) your failure to return properly completed certification materials by
the specified deadline (which includes your failure to timely return the
completed certification because you did not provide the Firm with updated
contact information) will result in the forfeiture of all of your RSUs and
Shares at Risk and subject previously delivered amounts to repayment under
Paragraph 9(b)(iv);

(vii) You Authorize the Firm to Register, in Its or Its Designee's Name, Any
Shares at Risk and Sell, Assign or Transfer Any Forfeited Shares at Risk. You
are granting to the Firm the full power and authority to register any Shares
at Risk in its or its designee's name and authorizing the Firm or its designee
to sell, assign or transfer any Shares at Risk if you forfeit your Shares at
Risk;

(viii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee, the SIP Committee or SIP
Administrators. If you disagree with a determination made by the Committee,
the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of their delegates or
designees and you wish to appeal such determination, you must submit a written
request to the SIP Committee for review within 180 days after the
determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal administrative remedies
( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution of that appeal) before
seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration pursuant to Paragraph 16 and
Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(ix) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition to
and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of the
Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to you
or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or any
other Award.

14. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph 14 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph 14 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The
Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
RSUs may transfer some or all of their RSUs and/or Shares at Risk (which will
continue to be subject to Transfer Restrictions until the [applicable]
Transferability Date) through a gift for no consideration to any immediate
family member, a trust or other estate planning vehicle approved by the
Committee or SIP Committee in which the recipient and/or the recipient's
immediate family members in the aggregate have 100% of the beneficial
interest.

15. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph 18[(f)][(g)],
the obligation to deliver RSU Shares, to pay dividends [or payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights] or to remove the Transfer

Restrictions under this Award Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the Plan,
which provides for the Firm's right to offset against such obligation any
outstanding amounts you owe to the Firm and any amounts the Committee deems
appropriate pursuant to any tax equalization policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

16. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN
SECTION   3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE
PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE
AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND
YOU ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO OR CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD
AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY SETTLED BY ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO
THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET FORTH IN SECTION   3.17 OF THE PLAN;
PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE YOU FROM FILING A CHARGE WITH OR
PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL
AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE SEC, THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE OR LOCAL HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCY, AS WELL AS
LAW ENFORCEMENT.

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
13(f)(viii).

17. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

18. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 18 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 18 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
18 will govern.

(b) Delivery of RSU Shares will not be delayed beyond the date on which all
applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares required by
this Agreement (including those specified in Paragraphs 6, 7, 11, 12(c) and 13
and the consents and other items specified in Section 3.3 of the Plan) are
satisfied. To the extent that any portion of this Award is intended to satisfy
the requirements for short-term deferral treatment under Section 409A,
delivery for such portion will occur by the March 15 coinciding with the last
day of the applicable "short-term deferral" period described in Reg.
1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for the delivery of RSU Shares to be within the short-
term deferral exception unless, in order to permit all applicable conditions
or restrictions on delivery to be satisfied, the Committee elects, pursuant to
Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted in accordance with
Section 409A, to delay delivery of RSU Shares to a later date within the same
calendar year or to such later date as may be permitted under Section 409A,
including Reg. 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt, if the Award includes
a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg. 1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii),
your right to the series of installment payments will be treated as a right to
a series of separate payments and not as a right to a single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 13(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any securities,
other Awards or other property that the Firm may deliver in respect of your
RSUs will not have the effect of deferring delivery or payment, income
inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture, beyond the date on which such
delivery, payment or inclusion would occur or such risk of forfeiture would
lapse, with respect to the RSU Shares that would otherwise have been
deliverable (unless the Committee elects a later date for this purpose
pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted under
Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the subsequent election
provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. 1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Notwithstanding the timing provisions of Paragraph 12(c), the delivery of
RSU Shares referred to therein will be made after the date of death and during
the calendar year that includes the date of death (or on such later date as
may be permitted under Section 409A).

(e) The timing of delivery or payment pursuant to Paragraph 12(a) will occur
on the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the termination of Employment occurs; provided ,
however , that, if you are a "specified employee" (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(i)(B) of the Code), delivery will occur on
the earlier of the Delivery Date or (to the extent required to avoid the
imposition of

additional tax under Section 409A) the date that is six months after your
termination of Employment (or, if the latter date is not during a Window
Period, the first trading day of the next Window Period). For purposes of
Paragraph 12(a), references in this Award Agreement to termination of
Employment mean a termination of Employment from the Firm (as defined by the
Firm) which is also a separation from service (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A).

(f) [Notwithstanding any provision of Paragraph 8 or Section 2.8.2 of the Plan
to the contrary, the Dividend Equivalent Rights with respect to each of your
Outstanding RSUs will be paid to you within the calendar year that includes
the date of distribution of any corresponding regular cash dividends paid by
GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock the record date for which occurs
on or after the Date of Grant. The payment will be in an amount (less
applicable withholding) equal to such regular dividend payment as would have
been made in respect of the RSU Shares underlying such Outstanding RSUs.]

(g) The timing of delivery or payment referred to in Paragraph 12(b)(i) will
be the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the Committee receives satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment, provided that such delivery or
payment will be made, and any Committee action referred to in Paragraph
12(b)(ii) will be taken, only at such time as, and if and to the extent that
it, as reasonably determined by the Firm, would not result in the imposition
of any additional tax to you under Section 409A.

(h) Paragraph 15 and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are
409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(i) Delivery of RSU Shares in respect of any Award may be made, if and to the
extent elected by the Committee, later than the Delivery Date or other date or
period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award that constitutes
409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later delivery is
permitted under Section 409A).

(j) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

19. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply, to limit the forfeitures and
repayments that result under Paragraphs 9 and 10 and to remove Transfer
Restrictions before the [applicable] Transferability Date. [In addition, the
Committee, in its sole discretion, may determine whether Paragraph 11 will
apply upon a termination of Employment.]

20. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax consequences of this Award or the timing of delivery of RSU Shares will
not be an amendment that

materially adversely affects your rights and obligations under this Award
Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement will be in writing.

21. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

22. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the
forfeiture and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 9 and 10) or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority includes federal, state and local
government agencies such as the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission and any state or local human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York
State Division of Human Rights, the New York City Commission on Human Rights,
the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law
enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

[ U.K. M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend delivery of RSU Shares or release of
Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any RSU Shares or dividends into an escrow
account in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer
Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any investigation of whether
any of the events that result in forfeiture under this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Loss Event" (as defined below)
or "Risk Event" (as defined below) and the extent to which: (1) you
participated in the Loss Event or Risk Event, (2) your compensation for
 may or may not have been adjusted to take into account the risk
associated with the Loss Event, Risk Event, your "Serious Misconduct" (as
defined below) or the Serious Misconduct of a "Supervised Employee" (as
defined below) and (3) your compensation may be adjusted for the year in which
the Loss Event, Risk Event, your Serious Misconduct or a Supervised Employee's
Serious Misconduct is discovered.

[Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this Appendix apply to your Additional and
Supplemental RSUs. Paragraph (d) of this Appendix applies to your Additional
RSUs only and does not apply to your Supplemental RSUs.]

(a) A Loss Event Occurs Prior to Delivery. If a Loss Event occurs prior to
the delivery of RSU Shares, your rights in respect of all or a portion of your
RSUs which are scheduled to deliver on the next Delivery Date immediately
following the date that the Loss Event is identified (or, if not practicable,
then the next following Delivery Date) will terminate, and no RSU Shares will
be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(i) A " Loss Event " means (A) an annual pre-tax loss at GS Inc. or (B)
annual negative revenues in one or more reporting segments as disclosed in the
Firm's Form 10-K other than the Asset Management segment, or annual negative
revenues in the Asset Management segment of $5 billion or more, provided in
either case that you are employed in a business within such reporting segment.

(b) A Risk Event Occurs  . If a Risk Event occurs
, (i) your rights in respect of all or a portion of your RSUs
will terminate and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs,
(ii) your rights to all or a portion of any Shares at Risk will terminate and
such Shares at Risk will be cancelled and (iii) you will be obligated
immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of
the greater of the Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend
payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount
applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations) determined as of (A)
the date the Risk Event occurred and (B) the date that the repayment request
is made.

(i) A " Risk Event " means there occurs a loss of 5% or more of firmwide
total capital from a reportable operational risk event determined in
accordance with the firmwide Reporting Operational Risk Events Policy.

(c) You Engage in Serious Misconduct . If you engage in
Serious Misconduct , you will be obligated immediately upon
demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of the
Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend payments) delivered in
respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax
withholding or other obligations) determined as of (i) the date the Serious
Misconduct occurred and (ii) the date that the repayment request is made.

(i) " Serious Misconduct " means that you engage in conduct that the Firm
reasonably considers, in its sole discretion, to be misconduct sufficient to
justify summary termination of employment under English law.

(d) A Supervised Employee Engages in Serious Misconduct. If the Committee
determines that it is appropriate to hold you accountable in whole or in part
for Serious Misconduct related to compliance, control or risk that occurred
during  by a Supervised Employee, your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your RSUs will terminate and no RSU Shares will be delivered in
respect of such RSUs and your rights to all or a portion of any Shares at Risk
will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be cancelled.

(i) " Supervised Employee " means an individual with respect to whom the
Committee determines you had supervisory responsibility as a result of direct
or indirect reporting lines or your management responsibility for an office,
division or business.

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Appendix (including your refusal to
remit payment) the parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with
Paragraph 16 of this Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole
means of resolution of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the
payment amount).]

[ GSBE M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend vesting of Outstanding RSUs, delivery of RSU
Shares or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any RSU Shares or
dividends into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 12(f)(v) or (c)
apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any
investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under
this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Adjustment Event" (as defined
below).

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by this Appendix (including your refusal to remit payment) the
parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with Paragraph 15 of this
Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole means of resolution
of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the payment amount).

(a) An Adjustment Event Occurs . If an "Adjustment Event" (as defined
below) occurs , (i) your rights in respect of all or a portion of
your RSUs will terminate and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of
such RSUs, (ii) your rights to all or a portion of any Shares at Risk will
terminate and such Shares at Risk will be cancelled, and (iii) you will be
obligated immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in
excess of the greater of the Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any
dividend payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without reduction for
any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations) determined
as of (A) the date the Adjustment Event occurred and (B) the date that the
repayment request is made.

(i) " Adjustment Event " means that one of the following has occurred:

A. you significantly contributed to, or were responsible for, any conduct that
resulted in a loss of 0.75% or more of the total capital of GS Inc.;

B. a material regulatory sanction for the Firm comprising one or more of the
following:

a moratorium pursuant to sec. 46g of the German Banking Act,  

a measure in case of danger pursuant to sec. 46 of the German Banking Act,  

the revocation of appointment of a manager pursuant to sec. 36 German Banking
Act,  

a fine pursuant to sec. 56 of the German Banking Act or a threatened penalty
payment, if the fine or penalty payment amounts to 0.75% or more of the total
capital of GS Inc.,  

the cancellation of the banking permit pursuant to sec. 35 of the German
Banking Act,  

an order to increase the capital requirements Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE
(GSBE) by at least 0.5% pursuant to sec. 10 of the German Banking Act,  

a measure in case of organizational deficiencies,  

a comparable regulatory order, or  

a material supervisory measure; or  

C. you acted in serious violation of relevant external or internal rules with
respect to suitability and conduct, provided that a violation is considered
serious if it suitable to justify a termination of employment for cause
pursuant to sec. 626 German Civil Code or a termination of employment for
misconduct pursuant to sec. 1 German Termination Protection Act.

The determination as to whether an Adjustment Event has occurred shall be made
by the Committee in its sole discretion.]

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) " Associate With a Covered Enterprise " means that you (i) form, or
acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit participation
interest in, any Covered Enterprise or (ii) associate in any capacity
(including association as an officer, employee, partner, director, consultant,
agent or advisor) with any Covered Enterprise. Associate With a Covered
Enterprise may include, as determined in the discretion of either the
Committee or the SIP Committee, (i) becoming the subject of any publicly
available announcement or report of a pending or future association with a
Covered Enterprise and (ii) unpaid associations, including an association in
contemplation of future employment. "Association With a Covered Enterprise"
will have its correlative meaning.

(c) " Conflicted Employment " means your employment at any U.S. Federal,
state or local government, any non-U.S. government, any supranational or
international organization, any self-regulatory organization, or any agency or
instrumentality of any such government or organization, or any other employer
(other than an "Accounting Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of
Regulation S-X or any successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a
result of such employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs and
Shares at Risk would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest.

(d) " Covered Enterprise " means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or that the Firm
reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages in,
holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any
other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage
("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities include any
activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage,
irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in furtherance of an
advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
any product or service, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in any activity, in any case, associated
with investment banking; public or private finance; lending; financial
advisory services; private investing for anyone other than you or your family
members (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any type of proprietary
investing or trading); private wealth management; private banking; consumer or
commercial cash management; consumer, digital or commercial banking; merchant
banking; asset, portfolio or hedge fund management; insurance or reinsurance
underwriting or brokerage; property management; or securities, futures,
commodities, energy, derivatives, currency or digital asset brokerage, sales,
lending, custody, clearance, settlement or trading.

An enterprise that offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be
expected to offer Firm Products or Services, or engages in, holds itself out
as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities is a
Covered Enterprise , irrespective of whether the enterprise is a customer,
client or counterparty of the Firm or is otherwise associated with the Firm
and, because the Firm is a global enterprise, irrespective of where the
Covered Enterprise is physically located.

(e) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(f) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(g) [" Sarbanes-Oxley " means the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended.]

(h) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

(i) " Selected Firm Personnel " means any individual who is or in the three
months preceding the conduct prohibited by Paragraph 9([a][b])(ii) was (i) a
Firm employee or consultant with whom you personally worked while employed by
the Firm, (ii) a Firm employee or consultant who, at any time during the year
preceding the date of the termination of your Employment, worked in the same
division in which you worked or (iii) an Advisory Director, a Managing
Director or a Senior Advisor of the Firm.

(j) " Shares at Risk " means RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan.

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the

"Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable, the ultimate parent entity that
directly or indirectly has beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule
13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such Rule is in effect on the date of the
adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more of the total voting power (in respect
of the election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity
other than a corporation) of the Surviving Entity (the "Parent Entity") is
represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS Inc. Securities") that were
outstanding immediately prior to such Reorganization or Sale (or, if
applicable, is represented by shares into which such GS Inc. Securities were
converted pursuant to such Reorganization or Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the
members of the board of directors (or similar officials in the case of an
entity other than a corporation) of the Parent Entity (or, if there is no
Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity) following the consummation of the
Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of the Board's approval of the
execution of the initial agreement providing for such Reorganization or Sale,
individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who either (A) were members of the
Board on the Effective Date or (B) became directors subsequent to the
Effective Date and whose election or nomination for election was approved by a
vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent Directors then on the Board
(either by a specific vote or by approval of GS Inc.'s proxy statement in
which such persons are named as nominees for director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Competitive Enterprise " means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity; (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in any entity that engages in any activity or
(iii) is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned by, or a significant
interest in which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned or controlled
by, any entity that engages in any activity that, in any case, competes or
will compete anywhere with any activity in which the Firm is engaged. The
activities covered by this definition include, without limitation: financial
services such as investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than the
Grantee and members of the Grantee's family (including for the avoidance of
doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading); private wealth
management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash management; consumer,
digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge
fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property
management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency
or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or
trading.

(n) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(o) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(p) " Delivery Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a delivery date, provided , unless the Committee determines
otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if such date is not during
a Window Period, the first trading day of the first Window Period beginning
after such date.

(q) [" Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.]

(r) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 of the Plan.

(s) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(t) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(u) " Extended Absence " means the Grantee's inability to perform for six
(6) continuous months, due to illness, injury or pregnancy-related
complications, substantially all the essential duties of the Grantee's
occupation, as determined by the Committee.

(v) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(w) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(x) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(y) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(z) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP

(aa) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been
forfeited, cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the
shares of Common Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered
or other payments made.

(bb) " Restricted Share " means a share of Common Stock delivered under the
Plan that is subject to Transfer Restrictions, forfeiture provisions and/or
other terms and conditions specified herein and in the Restricted Share Award
Agreement or other applicable Award Agreement. All references to Restricted
Shares include "Shares at Risk."

(cc) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(dd) " RSU Shares " means shares of Common Stock that underlie an RSU.

(ee) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(ff) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(gg) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(hh) " Solicit " means any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(ii) " Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.

(jj) " Transferability Date " means the date Transfer Restrictions on a
Restricted Share will be released. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date, GS Inc. shall take, or shall cause to be
taken, such steps as may be necessary to remove Transfer Restrictions.

(kk) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain Outstanding. The fact that an
Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise indicate that the Grantee has
an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such Award, and such Award shall
remain subject to such terms, conditions and forfeiture provisions as may be
provided for in the Plan or in the Award Agreement.

(ll) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which
all employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common
Stock ( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.43 8 d192225dex1043.htm EX-10.43  EX-10.43

Exhibit 10.43

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

Y EAR-END RSU AWARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your  year-end award of
RSUs (your "Award"). You should read carefully this entire Award Agreement,
which includes the Award Statement, any attached Appendix and the signature
card. 

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph 16.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
type and number of RSUs awarded to you and any applicable Vesting Dates,
Delivery Dates and Transferability Dates. [The portion of your RSUs that are
designated on the Award Statement as " Year-End Base RSUs" are referred to
in this Award Agreement as "Base RSUs." The portion of your RSUs that are
designated on the Award Statement as " Year-End Additional Base RSUs" are
referred to in this Award Agreement as "Additional Base RSUs." [The portion of
your RSUs that are designated on the Award Statement as " Year-End
Supplemental RSUs" are referred to in this Award Agreement as "Supplemental
RSUs."] All references to RSUs in this Award Agreement include the Base RSUs,
the Additional Base RSUs [and the Supplemental RSUs.]]

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR RSUS 

5. Vesting .

(a) On each Vesting Date listed on your Award Statement, you will become
Vested in the amount and type of RSUs listed next to that date.

(b) When an RSU becomes Vested, it means only that your continued active
Employment is not required for delivery of that portion of RSU Shares.
Vesting does not mean you have a non-forfeitable right to the Vested portion
of your Award. The terms of this Award Agreement (including conditions to
delivery and any applicable Transfer Restrictions) continue to apply to Vested
RSUs, and you can still forfeit Vested RSUs and any RSU Shares.

D ELIVERY OF YOUR RSU SHARES 

6. Delivery . Reasonably promptly (but no more than 30 Business
Days) after each Delivery Date listed on your Award Statement, RSU Shares
(less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph 13(a)) will be
delivered (by book entry credit to your Account) in respect of the amount of
Outstanding RSUs listed next to that date. The Committee or the SIP Committee
may select multiple dates within the 30-Business-Day period following the
Delivery Date to deliver RSU Shares in respect of all or a portion of the RSUs
with the same Delivery Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such dates
will be treated as a single Delivery Date for purposes of this Award. Until
such delivery, you have only the rights of a general unsecured creditor, and
no rights as a shareholder of GS Inc. Without limiting the Committee's
authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the Firm may accelerate any
Delivery Date by up to 30 days.

T RANSFER RESTRICTIONS FOLLOWING DELIVERY 

7. Transfer Restrictions and Shares at Risk .

(a)  percent of the RSU Shares that are delivered on any date will be
Shares at Risk subject to Transfer Restrictions until the [applicable]
Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement].

(b) Purported Transactions that Violate the Transfer Restrictions Are Void.
Any purported sale, exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation,
fractionalization, hedge or other disposition in violation of the Transfer
Restrictions on Shares at Risk will be void.

(c) Removal of Transfer Restrictions. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date (or any other date on which the Transfer
Restrictions are to be removed), GS Inc. will remove the Transfer
Restrictions. The Committee or the SIP Committee may select multiple dates
within such 30-Business-Day period on which to remove Transfer Restrictions
for all or a portion of the Shares at Risk with the same Transferability Date,
and all such dates will be treated as a single Transferability Date for
purposes of this Award.

D IVIDENDS 

8. [Dividend Equivalent Rights and] Dividends . [Each RSU includes
a Dividend Equivalent Right, which entitles you to receive an amount (less
applicable withholding), at or after the time of distribution of any regular
cash dividend paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock, equal to
any regular cash dividend payment that would have been made in respect of an
RSU Share underlying your Outstanding RSUs for any record date that occurs on
or after the Date of Grant. In addition,] [y][Y]ou will be entitled to receive
on a current basis any regular cash dividend paid in respect of your Shares at
Risk. [The RSUs do not include Dividend Equivalent Rights.]

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

9. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph 9 sets forth the
events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk
and may require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously
delivered or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10.
More than one event may apply, and in no case will the occurrence of one event
limit the forfeiture and repayment obligations as a result of the occurrence
of any other event. In addition, the Firm reserves the right to (a) suspend
vesting of Outstanding RSUs, [payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights,]
delivery of RSU Shares or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any
RSU Shares[,] [or] dividends [or payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights]
into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph

13(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection
with any investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture
under the Plan or this Paragraph 9 have occurred. Paragraph 11 (relating to
certain circumstances under which you will not forfeit your unvested RSUs upon
Employment termination) and Paragraph 12 (relating to certain circumstances
under which vesting, delivery and/or release of Transfer Restrictions may be
accelerated) provide for exceptions to one or more provisions of this
Paragraph 9. [[Each of] The [U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix] [and the]
[GSBE Material Risk Taker Appendix] supplements this Paragraph 9 and sets
forth additional events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs
and may require repayment to the Firm as described in Paragraph 10 [and][,]
the [U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix] [and the] [GSBE Material Risk Taker
Appendix].]

(a) Unvested RSUs Forfeited if Your Employment Terminates. If your
Employment terminates for any reason or you are otherwise no longer actively
Employed with the Firm (which includes off-premises notice periods, "garden
leaves," pay in lieu of notice or any other similar status), your rights to
your Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested will terminate, and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(b) Vested and Unvested[ Base and Additional Base] RSUs Forfeited Upon
Certain Events. If any of the following occurs before the applicable Delivery
Date, your rights to all of your Outstanding[ Base and Additional Base] RSUs
(whether or not Vested) will terminate, and no RSU Shares will be delivered in
respect of such RSUs:

(i) You Solicit Clients or Employees, Interfere with Client or Employee
Relationships or Participate in the Hiring of Employees. Either:

(A) you, in any manner, directly or indirectly, (1) Solicit any Client to
transact business with a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain from doing
any business with the Firm, (2) interfere with or damage (or attempt to
interfere with or damage) any relationship between the Firm and any Client,
(3) Solicit any person who is an employee of the Firm to resign from the Firm,
(4) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or accept employment (or
other association) with any person or entity other than the Firm or (5)
participate in the hiring of any Selected Firm Personnel by any person or
entity other than the Firm (including, without limitation, participating in
the identification of individuals for potential hire, and participating in any
hiring decision), whether as an employee or consultant or otherwise, or

(B) Selected Firm Personnel are Solicited, hired or accepted into partnership,
membership or similar status by any entity where you have, or will have,
direct or indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm Personnel,
unless the Committee determines that you were not involved in such
Solicitation, hiring or acceptance.

(ii) [GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. GS Inc.
fails to maintain the required "Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio" as defined under
Federal Reserve Board Regulations applicable to GS Inc. for a period of 90
consecutive business days.]

(iii) [GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. The Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the "FDIC")
makes a written recommendation under Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority)
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for the
appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of GS Inc. based on a determination that
GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of default."]

(c) Vested and Unvested[ Base, Additional Base and Supplemental] RSUs and
Shares at Risk Forfeited upon Certain Events. If any of the following occurs
(i) your rights to all

of your Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate, and no RSU
Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs and (ii) your rights to all
of your Shares at Risk will terminate and your Shares at Risk will be
cancelled, in each case, as may be further described below:

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during .

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before the applicable
Delivery Date for RSUs or the applicable Transferability Date for Shares at
Risk.

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the applicable Delivery Date for RSUs or the applicable
Transferability Date for Shares at Risk, you failed to meet, in any respect,
any obligation under any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement entered
into in connection with your Employment or this Award, including the Firm's
notice period requirement applicable to you, any offer letter, employment
agreement or any shareholders' agreement relating to the Firm. Your failure to
pay or reimburse the Firm, on demand, for any amount you owe to the Firm will
constitute (A) failure to meet an obligation you have under an agreement,
regardless of whether such obligation arises under a written agreement, and/or
(B) a material violation of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 16 or Section 3.17 of the Plan,
or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted your
internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(viii).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Outstanding RSUs or Shares at Risk;
provided , however , that your rights will only be terminated in respect
of the RSUs and Shares at Risk that are replaced, substituted for or otherwise
considered by such other entity in making its grant.

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

10. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award . If the Committee
determines that any term of this Award was not satisfied, you will be
required, immediately upon demand therefor, to repay to the Firm the
following:

(a) Any RSU Shares (which, for the avoidance of doubt, includes any Shares at
Risk) for which the terms (including the terms for delivery) of the related
RSUs were not satisfied, in accordance with Section 2.6.3 of the Plan.

(b) Any Shares at Risk for which the terms (including the terms for the
release of Transfer Restrictions) were not satisfied, in accordance with
Section 2.5.3 of the Plan.

(c) Any RSU Shares that were delivered (but not subject to Transfer
Restrictions) at the same time any Shares at Risk that are cancelled or
required to be repaid were delivered.

(d) [Any payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights for which the terms were
not satisfied (including any such payments made in respect of RSUs that are
forfeited or RSU Shares that are cancelled or required to be repaid), in
accordance with Section 2.8.3 of the Plan.]

(e) Any dividends paid in respect of any RSU Shares that are cancelled or
required to be repaid.

(f) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any RSUs, RSU Shares[,] [and] dividend payments [and payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights] that are forfeited or required to be repaid.

E XCEPTIONS TO THE VESTING, DELIVERY AND/OR TRANSFERABILITY DATES 

11. Circumstances Under Which You Will Not Forfeit Your Unvested RSUs on
Employment Termination (but the Original Delivery Date and Transferability
Date Continue to Apply) . If your Employment terminates at a time when
you meet the requirements for Extended Absence, Retirement, "downsizing" or
Approved Termination, each as described below, then Paragraph 9(a) will not
apply, and your Outstanding RSUs will be treated as described in this
Paragraph 11. All other terms of this Award Agreement, including the other
forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.

(a) Extended Absence or Retirement and No Association With a Covered
Enterprise.

(i) Generally. If your Employment terminates by Extended Absence or
Retirement, your Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested will become Vested.
However, your rights to any Outstanding RSU that becomes Vested by this
Paragraph 11(a)(i) will terminate and no RSU Share will be delivered in
respect of that RSU if you Associate With a Covered Enterprise on or before
the originally scheduled Vesting Date for that RSU.

(ii) Special Treatment for Involuntary or Mutual Agreement Termination. The
second sentence of Paragraph 11(a)(i) (each relating to forfeiture if you
Associate With a Covered Enterprise) will not apply if (A) the Firm
characterizes your Employment termination as "involuntary" or by "mutual
agreement" (and, in each case, you have not engaged in conduct constituting
Cause) and (B) you execute a general waiver and release of claims and an
agreement to pay any associated tax liability, in each case, in the form the
Firm prescribes. No Employment termination that you initiate, including any
purported "constructive termination," a "termination for good reason" or
similar concepts, can be "involuntary" or by "mutual agreement."

(b) Downsizing. If (i) the Firm terminates your Employment solely by reason
of a "downsizing" (and you have not engaged in conduct constituting Cause) and
(ii) you execute a general waiver and release of claims and an agreement to
pay any associated tax liability, in each

case, in the form the Firm prescribes, your Outstanding RSUs that are not yet
Vested will become Vested. Whether or not your Employment is terminated solely
by reason of a "downsizing" will be determined by the Firm in its sole
discretion.

(c) Approved Terminations of Fixed-Term Employees. If the Firm classifies
you as a "fixed-term" employee and your Employment terminates solely by reason
of an Approved Termination (and you have not engaged in conduct constituting
Cause), your Outstanding RSUs that are not yet Vested will become Vested.

12. Accelerated Vesting, Delivery and/or Release of Transfer Restrictions
in the Event of a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control, Conflicted
Employment or Death . In the event of your Qualifying Termination After
a Change in Control, Conflicted Employment or death, each as described below,
then Paragraph 9(a) will not apply, your Outstanding RSUs and Shares at Risk
will be treated as described in this Paragraph 12, and, except as set forth in
Paragraph 12(a), all other terms of this Award Agreement, including the other
forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a Change in Control, the RSU Shares underlying your
Outstanding RSUs (whether or not Vested) will be delivered, and any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply. In addition, the forfeiture events in
Paragraph 9 will not apply to your Award.

(b) You Are Determined to Have Accepted Conflicted Employment.

(i) Generally. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan or
otherwise, for purposes of this Award Agreement, "Conflicted Employment" means
your employment at any U.S. Federal, state or local government, any non-U.S.
government, any supranational or international organization, any self-
regulatory organization, or any agency or instrumentality of any such
government or organization, or any other employer (other than an "Accounting
Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of Regulation S-X or any
successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a result of such
employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs and Shares at Risk
would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest. Unless prohibited
by applicable law or regulation, the following will apply as soon as
practicable after the Committee has received satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment.

(A) Vesting. If your Employment terminates solely because you resign to
accept Conflicted Employment and you have completed at least three years of
continuous service with the Firm, your Outstanding RSUs will Vest; otherwise,
you will forfeit any Outstanding RSUs that are not Vested in accordance with
Paragraph 9(a).

(B) Delivery and Release of Transfer Restrictions. If your Employment
terminates solely because you resign to accept Conflicted Employment or if,
following your termination of Employment, you notify the Firm that you are
accepting Conflicted Employment, RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of
your Outstanding Vested RSUs (including in the form of cash as described in
Paragraph 13(b)) and any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply.

(ii) You May Have to Take Other Steps to Address Conflicts of Interest. The
Committee retains the authority to exercise its rights under the Award
Agreement or the Plan

(including Section 1.3.2 of the Plan) to take or require you to take other
steps it determines in its sole discretion to be necessary or appropriate to
cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest (which may include a
determination that the accelerated vesting, delivery and/or release of
Transfer Restrictions described in Paragraph 12(b)(i) will not apply because
such actions are not necessary or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived
conflict of interest).

(c) Death. If you die, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding RSUs
(whether or not Vested) will be delivered to the representative of your estate
and any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply as soon as practicable after
the date of death and after such documentation as may be requested by the
Committee is provided to the Committee.

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

13. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
RSU Shares is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable withholding
taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes the Firm
deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to you. In
addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its sole
discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion of
any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you or
the Firm in connection with the grant, Vesting or delivery of this Award by
requiring you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or through
payroll deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from the
Firm's executing a sale of RSU Shares delivered to you under this Award. In no
event, however, does this Paragraph 13(a) give you any discretion to determine
or affect the timing of the delivery of RSU Shares or the timing of payment of
tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property Instead of RSU Shares. In
accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole discretion of the
Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the RSU Shares, the Firm may
deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan or other property,
and all references in this Award Agreement to deliveries of RSU Shares will
include such deliveries of cash, other securities, other awards under the Plan
or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. RSUs that become
Vested on a Vesting Date, RSU Shares that become deliverable on a Delivery
Date and RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions may, in each case, be
rounded to avoid fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your RSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party to any
shareholders' agreement to which other similarly situated employees ( e.g.,
employees with a similar title or position) of the Firm are required to be a
party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Restricted RSU Shares.
GS Inc. may affix to Certificates representing RSU Shares any legend that the
Committee determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any
restrictions to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc.
may advise the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended RSU
Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in RSU Shares and hedging or pledging RSU Shares and equity-based compensation
or other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with
Respect to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards"
or any successor policies), and confidential or proprietary information, and
you will effect sales of RSU Shares in accordance with such rules and
procedures as may be adopted from time to time (which may include, without
limitation, restrictions relating to the timing of sale requests, the manner
in which sales are executed, pricing method, consolidation or aggregation of
orders and volume limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your RSUs, including those related to the sale of RSU Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery of, or Sell, RSU Shares. You will be deemed
to have represented and certified that you have complied with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement when RSU Shares are delivered to you[,
you receive payment in respect of Dividend Equivalent Rights] and you request
the sale of RSU Shares following the release of Transfer Restrictions;

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate, and the delivery
of RSU Shares (including Shares at Risk) or the payment of cash (including
dividends [and payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights]) or other property
may initially be made into and held in that escrow account until such time as
the Committee has received such documentation as it may have requested or
until the Committee has determined that any other conditions or restrictions
on delivery of RSU Shares, cash or other property required by this Award
Agreement have been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold RSUs or Shares at Risk, from time to time, you may
be required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraph 9(c)(iv). You
understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the Firm at the time
any certification is required will be deemed to be your current address, (B)
it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of any changes to your address to
ensure timely receipt of the certification materials, (C) you are responsible
for contacting the Firm to obtain such certification materials if not received
and (D) your failure to return properly completed certification materials by
the specified deadline (which includes your failure to timely return the
completed certification because you did not provide the Firm with updated
contact information) will result in the forfeiture of all of your RSUs and
Shares at Risk and subject previously delivered amounts to repayment under
Paragraph 9(c)(iv);

(vii) You Authorize the Firm to Register, in Its or Its Designee's Name, Any
Shares at Risk and Sell, Assign or Transfer Any Forfeited Shares at Risk. You
are granting to the Firm the full power and authority to register any Shares
at Risk in its or its designee's name and authorizing the Firm or its designee
to sell, assign or transfer any Shares at Risk if you forfeit your Shares at
Risk;

(viii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee, the SIP Committee or SIP
Administrators. If you disagree with a determination made by the Committee,
the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of their delegates or
designees and you wish to appeal such determination, you must submit a written
request to the SIP Committee for review within 180 days after the
determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal administrative remedies
( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution of that appeal) before
seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration pursuant to Paragraph 16 and
Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(ix) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition to
and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of the
Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to you
or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or any
other Award.

14. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph 14 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph 14 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The
Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
RSUs may transfer some or all of their RSUs and/or Shares at Risk (which will
continue to be subject to Transfer Restrictions until the applicable
Transferability Date) through a gift for no consideration to any immediate
family member, a trust or other estate planning vehicle approved by the
Committee or SIP Committee in which the recipient and/or the recipient's
immediate family members in the aggregate have 100% of the beneficial
interest.

15. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph 18([g][h]),
the obligation to deliver RSU Shares, to pay dividends [or payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights] or to remove the Transfer Restrictions under this
Award Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the Plan, which provides for the
Firm's right to offset against such obligation any outstanding amounts you owe
to the Firm and any amounts the Committee deems appropriate pursuant to any
tax equalization policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

16. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN SECTION
3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE
EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT
ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND YOU ARISING OUT OF OR
RELATING TO OR CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY
SETTLED BY ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET
FORTH IN SECTION 3.17 OF THE PLAN; PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE
YOU FROM FILING A CHARGE WITH OR PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR
PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT 

LIMITED TO THE SEC, THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE
OR LOCAL HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCY, AS WELL AS LAW ENFORCEMENT.

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
13(f)(viii).

17. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

18. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 18 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 18 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
18 will govern.

(b) Delivery of RSU Shares will not be delayed beyond the date on which all
applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares required by
this Agreement

(including those specified in Paragraphs 6, 7, 11(a)(ii), 11(b), 12(c) and 13
and the consents and other items specified in Section 3.3 of the Plan) are
satisfied. To the extent that any portion of this Award is intended to satisfy
the requirements for short-term deferral treatment under Section 409A,
delivery for such portion will occur by the March 15 coinciding with the last
day of the applicable "short-term deferral" period described in Reg.
1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for the delivery of RSU Shares to be within the short-
term deferral exception unless, in order to permit all applicable conditions
or restrictions on delivery to be satisfied, the Committee elects, pursuant to
Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted in accordance with
Section 409A, to delay delivery of RSU Shares to a later date within the same
calendar year or to such later date as may be permitted under Section 409A,
including Reg. 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt, if the Award includes
a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg. 1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii),
your right to the series of installment payments will be treated as a right to
a series of separate payments and not as a right to a single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 13(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any securities,
other Awards or other property that the Firm may deliver in respect of your
RSUs will not have the effect of deferring delivery or payment, income
inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture, beyond the date on which such
delivery, payment or inclusion would occur or such risk of forfeiture would
lapse, with respect to the RSU Shares that would otherwise have been
deliverable (unless the Committee elects a later date for this purpose
pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted under
Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the subsequent election
provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. 1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Notwithstanding the timing provisions of Paragraph 12(c), the delivery of
RSU Shares referred to therein will be made after the date of death and during
the calendar year that includes the date of death (or on such later date as
may be permitted under Section 409A).

(e) The timing of delivery or payment pursuant to Paragraph 12(a) will occur
on the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the termination of Employment occurs; provided ,
however , that, if you are a "specified employee" (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(i)(B) of the Code), delivery will occur on
the earlier of the Delivery Date or (to the extent required to avoid the
imposition of additional tax under Section 409A) the date that is six months
after your termination of Employment (or, if the latter date is not during a
Window Period, the first trading day of the next Window Period). For purposes
of Paragraph 12(a), references in this Award Agreement to termination of
Employment mean a termination of Employment from the Firm (as defined by the
Firm) which is also a separation from service (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A).

(f) [Notwithstanding any provision of Paragraph 8 or Section 2.8.2 of the Plan
to the contrary, the Dividend Equivalent Rights with respect to each of your
Outstanding RSUs will be paid to you within the calendar year that includes
the date of distribution of any corresponding regular cash dividends paid by
GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock the record date for which occurs
on or after the Date of Grant. The payment will be in an amount (less
applicable withholding) equal to such regular dividend payment as would have
been made in respect of the RSU Shares underlying such Outstanding RSUs.]

(g) The timing of delivery or payment referred to in Paragraph 12(b)(i) will
be the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the Committee receives satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment, 

provided that such delivery or payment will be made, and any Committee
action referred to in Paragraph 12(b)(ii) will be taken, only at such time as,
and if and to the extent that it, as reasonably determined by the Firm, would
not result in the imposition of any additional tax to you under Section 409A.

(h) Paragraph 15 and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are
409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(i) Delivery of RSU Shares in respect of any Award may be made, if and to the
extent elected by the Committee, later than the Delivery Date or other date or
period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award that constitutes
409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later delivery is
permitted under Section 409A).

(j) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

19. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply, to limit the forfeitures and
repayments that result under Paragraphs 9 and 10 and to remove Transfer
Restrictions before the applicable Transferability Date. In addition, the
Committee, in its sole discretion, may determine whether Paragraphs 11(a)(ii)
and 11(b) will apply upon a termination of Employment and whether a
termination of Employment constitutes an Approved Termination under Paragraph
11(c).

20. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax consequences of this Award or the timing of delivery of RSU Shares will
not be an amendment that materially adversely affects your rights and
obligations under this Award Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement
will be in writing.

21. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

22. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the
forfeiture and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 9 and 10) or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority

includes federal, state and local government agencies such as the SEC, the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and any state or local human rights
agency ( e.g. , the New York State Division of Human Rights, the New York
City Commission on Human Rights, the California Department of Fair Employment
and Housing), as well as law enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

[ U.K. M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend vesting of Outstanding RSUs, delivery of RSU
Shares or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any RSU Shares or
dividends into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c)
apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any
investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under
this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Loss Event" (as defined below)
or "Risk Event" (as defined below) and the extent to which: (1) you
participated in the Loss Event or Risk Event, (2) your compensation for
 may or may not have been adjusted to take into account the risk
associated with the Loss Event, Risk Event, your "Serious Misconduct" (as
defined below) or the Serious Misconduct of a "Supervised Employee" (as
defined below) and (3) your compensation may be adjusted for the year in which
the Loss Event, Risk Event, your Serious Misconduct or a Supervised Employee's
Serious Misconduct is discovered.

[Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this Appendix apply to your Additional and
Supplemental RSUs. Paragraph (d) of this Appendix applies to your Additional
RSUs only and does not apply to your Supplemental RSUs.]

(a) A Loss Event Occurs Prior to Delivery. If a Loss Event occurs prior
to the delivery of RSU Shares, your rights in respect of all or a portion of
your RSUs (whether or not Vested) which are scheduled to deliver on the next
Delivery Date immediately following the date that the Loss Event is identified
(or, if not practicable, then the next following Delivery Date) will
terminate, and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs.

(i) A " Loss Event " means (A) an annual pre-tax loss at GS Inc. or (B)
annual negative revenues in one or more reporting segments as disclosed in the
Firm's Form 10-K other than the Asset Management segment, or annual negative
revenues in the Asset Management segment of $5 billion or more, provided in
either case that you are employed in a business within such reporting segment.

(b) A Risk Event Occurs . If a Risk Event occurs , (i) your
rights in respect of all or a portion of your RSUs (whether or not Vested)
will terminate and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs,
(ii) your rights to all or a portion of any Shares at Risk will terminate and
such Shares at Risk will be cancelled and (iii) you will be obligated
immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of
the greater of the Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend
payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount
applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations) determined as of (A)
the date the Risk Event occurred and (B) the date that the repayment request
is made.

(i) A " Risk Event " means there occurs a loss of 5% or more of firmwide
total capital from a reportable operational risk event determined in
accordance with the firmwide Reporting Operational Risk Events Policy.

(c) You Engage in Serious Misconduct . If you engage in Serious
Misconduct , you will be obligated immediately upon demand
therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of the Fair
Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend payments) delivered in
respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax
withholding or other obligations) determined as of (i) the date the Serious
Misconduct occurred and (ii) the date that the repayment request is made.

(i) " Serious Misconduct " means that you engage in conduct that the Firm
reasonably considers, in its sole discretion, to be misconduct sufficient to
justify summary termination of employment under English law.

(d) A Supervised Employee Engages in Serious Misconduct. If the Committee
determines that it is appropriate to hold you accountable in whole or in part
for Serious Misconduct related to compliance, control or risk that occurred
during  by a Supervised Employee, your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs and your rights to all or a portion
of any Shares at Risk will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be
cancelled.

(i) " Supervised Employee " means an individual with respect to whom the
Committee determines you had supervisory responsibility as a result of direct
or indirect reporting lines or your management responsibility for an office,
division or business.

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Appendix (including your refusal to
remit payment) the parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with
Paragraph 16 of this Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole
means of resolution of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the
payment amount).]

[GSBE M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX 

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your RSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend vesting of Outstanding RSUs, delivery of RSU
Shares or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver any RSU Shares or
dividends into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c)
apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any
investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under
this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Adjustment Event" (as defined
below).

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by this Appendix (including your refusal to remit payment) the
parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with Paragraph 16 of this
Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole means of resolution
of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the payment amount).

(a) An Adjustment Event Occurs . If an "Adjustment Event" (as
defined below) occurs , (i) your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your RSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate and no RSU Shares
will be delivered in respect of such RSUs, (ii) your rights to all or a
portion of any Shares at Risk will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be
cancelled, and (iii) you will be obligated immediately upon demand therefor to
pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of the Fair Market Value
of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend payments) delivered in respect of the
Award (without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or
other obligations) determined as of (A) the date the Adjustment Event occurred
and (B) the date that the repayment request is made.

(i) " Adjustment Event " means that one of the following has occurred:

A. you significantly contributed to, or were responsible for, any conduct that
resulted in a loss of 0.75% or more of the total capital of GS Inc.;

B. a material regulatory sanction for the Firm comprising one or more of the
following:

a moratorium pursuant to sec. 46g of the German Banking Act,  

a measure in case of danger pursuant to sec. 46 of the German Banking Act,  

the revocation of appointment of a manager pursuant to sec. 36 German Banking
Act,  

a fine pursuant to sec. 56 of the German Banking Act or a  

threatened penalty payment, if the fine or penalty payment amounts to 0.75% or
more of the total capital of GS Inc.,

the cancellation of the banking permit pursuant to sec. 35 of the German
Banking Act,  

an order to increase the capital requirements Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE
(GSBE) by at least 0.5% pursuant to sec. 10 of the German Banking Act,  

a measure in case of organizational deficiencies,  

a comparable regulatory order, or  

a material supervisory measure; or  

C. you acted in serious violation of relevant external or internal rules with
respect to suitability and conduct, provided that a violation is considered
serious if it suitable to justify a termination of employment for cause
pursuant to sec. 626 German Civil Code or a termination of employment for
misconduct pursuant to sec. 1 German Termination Protection Act.

The determination as to whether an Adjustment Event has occurred shall be made
by the Committee in its sole discretion.]

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) " Approved Termination " means that you are classified by the Firm as a
"fixed-term employee" and you (i) successfully complete the fixed-term
engagement, as determined by the Firm in its sole discretion, including
remaining Employed through the completion date specified by the Firm, and (ii)
terminate Employment immediately after the completion date without any "stay-
on" or other agreement or understanding to continue Employment with the Firm.
If you agree to stay with the Firm as an employee after your fixed-term
engagement ends and then later terminate Employment, you will not have an
Approved Termination.

(c) " Associate With a Covered Enterprise " means that you (i) form, or
acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit participation
interest in, any Covered Enterprise or (ii) associate in any capacity
(including association as an officer, employee, partner, director, consultant,
agent or advisor) with any Covered Enterprise. Associate With a Covered
Enterprise may include, as determined in the discretion of either the
Committee or the SIP Committee, (i) becoming the subject of any publicly
available announcement or report of a pending or future association with a
Covered Enterprise and (ii) unpaid associations, including an association in
contemplation of future employment. "Association With a Covered Enterprise"
will have its correlative meaning.

(d) " Conflicted Employment " means your employment at any U.S. Federal,
state or local government, any non-U.S. government, any supranational or
international organization, any self-regulatory organization, or any agency or
instrumentality of any such government or organization, or any other employer
(other than an "Accounting Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of
Regulation S-X or any successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a
result of such employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding RSUs and
Shares at Risk would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest.

(e) " Covered Enterprise " means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or that the Firm
reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages in,
holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any
other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage
("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities include any
activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage,
irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in furtherance of an
advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be

expected to offer any product or service, or engages in, holds itself out as
engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any activity, in any
case, associated with investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than you or
your family members (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any type of
proprietary investing or trading); private wealth management; private banking;
consumer or commercial cash management; consumer, digital or commercial
banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge fund management;
insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property management; or
securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency or digital
asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or trading. An
enterprise that offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be
expected to offer Firm Products or Services, or engages in, holds itself out
as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities is a
Covered Enterprise , irrespective of whether the enterprise is a customer,
client or counterparty of the Firm or is otherwise associated with the Firm
and, because the Firm is a global enterprise, irrespective of where the
Covered Enterprise is physically located.

(f) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(g) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(h) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

(i) " Selected Firm Personnel " means any individual who is or in the three
months preceding the conduct prohibited by Paragraph 9(b)(i) was (i) a Firm
employee or consultant with whom you personally worked while employed by the
Firm, (ii) a Firm employee or consultant who, at any time during the year
preceding the date of the termination of your Employment, worked in the same
division in which you worked or (iii) an Advisory Director, a Managing
Director or a Senior Advisor of the Firm.

(j) " Shares at Risk " means RSU Shares subject to Transfer Restrictions.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan.

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the

"Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable, the ultimate parent entity that
directly or indirectly has beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule
13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such Rule is in effect on the date of the
adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more of the total voting power (in respect
of the election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity
other than a corporation) of the Surviving Entity (the "Parent Entity") is
represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS Inc. Securities") that were
outstanding immediately prior to such Reorganization or Sale (or, if
applicable, is represented by shares into which such GS Inc. Securities were
converted pursuant to such Reorganization or Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the
members of the board of directors (or similar officials in the case of an
entity other than a corporation) of the Parent Entity (or, if there is no
Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity) following the consummation of the
Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of the Board's approval of the
execution of the initial agreement providing for such Reorganization or Sale,
individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who either (A) were members of the
Board on the Effective Date or (B) became directors subsequent to the
Effective Date and whose election or nomination for election was approved by a
vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent Directors then on the Board
(either by a specific vote or by approval of GS Inc.'s proxy statement in
which such persons are named as nominees for director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Competitive Enterprise " means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity; (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in any entity that engages in any activity or
(iii) is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned by, or a significant
interest in which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned or controlled
by, any entity that engages in any activity that, in any case, competes or
will compete anywhere with any activity in which the Firm is engaged. The
activities covered by this definition include, without limitation: financial
services such as investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than the
Grantee and members of the Grantee's family (including for the avoidance of
doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading); private wealth
management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash management; consumer,
digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge
fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property
management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency
or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or
trading.

(n) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(o) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(p) " Delivery Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a delivery date, provided , unless the Committee determines
otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if such date is not during
a Window Period, the first trading day of the first Window Period beginning
after such date.

(q) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(r) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 of the Plan.

(s) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(t) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(u) " Extended Absence " means the Grantee's inability to perform for six
(6) continuous months, due to illness, injury or pregnancy-related
complications, substantially all the essential duties of the Grantee's
occupation, as determined by the Committee.

(v) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(w) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(x) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(y) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(z) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP.

(aa) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been
forfeited, cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the
shares of Common Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered
or other payments made.

(bb) " Restricted Share " means a share of Common Stock delivered under the
Plan that is subject to Transfer Restrictions, forfeiture provisions and/or
other terms and conditions specified herein and in the Restricted Share Award
Agreement or other applicable Award Agreement. All references to Restricted
Shares include "Shares at Risk."

(cc) " Retirement " means termination of the Grantee's Employment (other
than for Cause) on or after the Date of Grant at a time when (i) (A) the sum
of the Grantee's age plus years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) equals or exceeds 60 and (B) the Grantee has
completed at least 10 years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) or, if earlier, (ii) (A) the Grantee has
attained age 50 and (B) the Grantee has completed at least five years of
service with the Firm (as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion).

(dd) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(ee) " RSU Shares " means shares of Common Stock that underlie an RSU.

(ff) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(gg) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(hh) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(ii) " Solicit " means any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(jj) " Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.

(kk) " Transferability Date " means the date Transfer Restrictions on a
Restricted Share will be released. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date, GS Inc. shall take, or shall cause to be
taken, such steps as may be necessary to remove Transfer Restrictions.

(ll) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain Outstanding. The fact that an
Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise indicate that the Grantee has
an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such Award, and such Award shall
remain subject to such terms, conditions and forfeiture provisions as may be
provided for in the Plan or in the Award Agreement.

(mm) " Vesting Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a date on which part or all of an Award becomes Vested.

(nn) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which
all employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common
Stock ( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.44 9 d192225dex1044.htm EX-10.44  EX-10.44

Exhibit 10.44

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

Y EAR-END SHORT-TERM RSU AWARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your  year-end award of
Short-Term RSUs (your "Award"). You should read carefully this entire Award
Agreement, which includes the Award Statement, any attached Appendix and the
signature card. 

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph 14.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
number of Short-Term RSUs awarded to you and the Delivery Date.

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR RSUS 

5. Vesting . All of your Short-Term RSUs are Vested. When an RSU is
Vested, it means only that your continued active Employment is not
required for delivery of that portion of RSU Shares. Vesting does not mean
you have a non-forfeitable right to the Vested portion of your Award. The
terms of this Award Agreement (including conditions to delivery) continue to
apply to Vested Short-Term RSUs, and you can still forfeit Vested Short-Term
RSUs and any RSU Shares.

D ELIVERY OF YOUR RSU SHARES 

6. Delivery . Reasonably promptly (but no more than 30 Business
Days) after each Delivery Date listed on your Award Statement, RSU Shares
(less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph 11(a)) will be
delivered (by book entry credit to your Account) in respect of the amount of
Outstanding Short-Term RSUs listed next to that date. The Committee or the SIP
Committee may select multiple dates within the 30-Business-Day period
following the Delivery Date to deliver RSU Shares in respect of all or a
portion of the Short-Term RSUs with the same Delivery Date listed on the Award
Statement, and all such dates will be treated as a single Delivery Date for
purposes of this Award. Until such delivery, you have only the rights of a
general unsecured creditor, and no rights as a shareholder of GS Inc. Without
limiting the Committee's authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the
Firm may accelerate any Delivery Date by up to 30 days.

D IVIDENDS 

7. Dividend Equivalent Rights and Dividends . Each Short-Term RSU
includes a Dividend Equivalent Right, which entitles you to receive an amount
(less applicable withholding), at or after the time of distribution of any
regular cash dividend paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock,
equal to any regular cash dividend payment that would have been made in
respect of an RSU Share underlying your Outstanding Short-Term RSUs for any
record date that occurs on or after the Date of Grant.

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

8. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph 8 sets forth the
events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your Short-Term RSUs and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 9. More than one
event may apply, and in no case will the occurrence of one event limit the
forfeiture and repayment obligations as a result of the occurrence of any
other event. In addition, the Firm reserves the right to (a) suspend payments
under Dividend Equivalent Rights or delivery of RSU Shares, (b) deliver any
RSU Shares, dividends or payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights into an
escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 11(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer
Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any investigation of whether
any of the events that result in forfeiture under the Plan or this Paragraph 8
have occurred. Paragraph 10 (relating to certain circumstances under which
delivery may be accelerated) provides for exceptions to one or more provisions
of this Paragraph 8. [[Each of] The [U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix] [and
the] [GSBE Material Risk Taker Appendix] supplements this Paragraph 8 and sets
forth additional events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your Short-
Term RSUs and may require repayment to the Firm as described in Paragraph 9
[and][,] the [U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix] [and the] [GSBE Material Risk
Taker Appendix].]

(a) Short-Term RSUs Forfeited Upon Certain Events. If any of the following
occurs, your rights to all of your Outstanding Short-Term RSUs will terminate,
and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of such RSUs, as may be further
described below:

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before the Delivery Date.

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the Delivery Date, you failed to meet, in any respect, any
obligation under any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement entered into in
connection with your Employment or this Award, including the Firm's notice
period requirement applicable to you, any offer letter, employment agreement
or any shareholders' agreement relating to the Firm. Your failure to pay or
reimburse the Firm, on demand, for any amount you owe to the Firm will
constitute (A) failure to meet an obligation you have under an agreement,
regardless of whether such obligation arises under a written agreement, and/or
(B) a material violation of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 14 or Section 3.17 of the Plan,
or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted your
internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 11(f)(vii).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Outstanding Short-Term RSUs; provided ,
however , that your rights will only be terminated in respect of the Short-
Term RSUs that are replaced, substituted for or otherwise considered by such
other entity in making its grant.

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

9. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award . If the Committee
determines that any term of this Award was not satisfied, you will be
required, immediately upon demand therefor, to repay to the Firm the
following:

(a) Any RSU Shares for which the terms (including the terms for delivery) of
the related Short-Term RSUs were not satisfied, in accordance with Section
2.6.3 of the Plan.

(b) Any payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights for which the terms were not
satisfied (including any such payments made in respect of Short-Term RSUs that
are forfeited or RSU Shares that are cancelled or required to be repaid), in
accordance with Section 2.8.3 of the Plan.

(c) Any dividends paid in respect of any RSU Shares that are cancelled or
required to be repaid.

(d) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any Short-Term RSUs, RSU Shares, dividend payments and payments
under Dividend Equivalent Rights that are forfeited or required to be repaid.

E XCEPTIONS TO THE DELIVERY DATE 

10. Accelerated Delivery in the Event of a Qualifying Termination After a
Change in Control, Conflicted Employment or Death . In the event of
your Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control, Conflicted Employment
or death, each as described below, your Outstanding Short-Term RSUs will be
treated as described in this Paragraph 10, and, except as set forth in
Paragraph 10(a), all other terms of this Award Agreement, including the other
forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 8 and 9, continue to apply.

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a

Change in Control, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding Short-Term RSUs
will be delivered. In addition, the forfeiture events in Paragraph 8 will not
apply to your Award.

(b) You Are Determined to Have Accepted Conflicted Employment.

(i) Generally. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan or
otherwise, for purposes of this Award Agreement, "Conflicted Employment" means
your employment at any U.S. Federal, state or local government, any non-U.S.
government, any supranational or international organization, any self-
regulatory organization, or any agency or instrumentality of any such
government or organization, or any other employer (other than an "Accounting
Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of Regulation S-X or any
successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a result of such
employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding Short-Term RSUs would
result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest. Unless prohibited by
applicable law or regulation, if your Employment terminates solely because you
resign to accept Conflicted Employment or if, following your termination of
Employment, you notify the Firm that you are accepting Conflicted Employment,
RSU Shares will be delivered in respect of your Outstanding Short-Term RSUs
(including in the form of cash as described in Paragraph 11(b)) as soon as
practicable after the Committee has received satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment.

(ii) You May Have to Take Other Steps to Address Conflicts of Interest. The
Committee retains the authority to exercise its rights under the Award
Agreement or the Plan (including Section 1.3.2 of the Plan) to take or require
you to take other steps it determines in its sole discretion to be necessary
or appropriate to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest (which may
include a determination that the accelerated delivery described in Paragraph
10(b)(i) will not apply because such actions are not necessary or appropriate
to cure an actual or perceived conflict of interest).

(c) Death. If you die, the RSU Shares underlying your Outstanding Short-Term
RSUs will be delivered to the representative of your estate as soon as
practicable after the date of death and after such documentation as may be
requested by the Committee is provided to the Committee.

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

11. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
RSU Shares is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable withholding
taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes the Firm
deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to you. In
addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its sole
discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion of
any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you or
the Firm in connection with the grant or delivery of this Award by requiring
you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or through payroll
deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from the Firm's
executing a sale of RSU Shares delivered to you under this Award. In no event,
however, does this Paragraph 11(a) give you any discretion to determine or
affect the timing of the delivery of RSU Shares or the timing of payment of
tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property Instead of RSU Shares. In
accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole discretion of the
Committee, in lieu of all or any

portion of the RSU Shares, the Firm may deliver cash, other securities, other
awards under the Plan or other property, and all references in this Award
Agreement to deliveries of RSU Shares will include such deliveries of cash,
other securities, other awards under the Plan or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. RSU Shares that
become deliverable on a Delivery Date may, in each case, be rounded to avoid
fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your Short-Term RSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party
to any shareholders' agreement to which other similarly situated employees (
e.g., employees with a similar title or position) of the Firm are required
to be a party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Restricted RSU Shares.
GS Inc. may affix to Certificates representing RSU Shares any legend that the
Committee determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any
restrictions to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc.
may advise the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended RSU
Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in RSU Shares and hedging or pledging RSU Shares and equity-based compensation
or other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with
Respect to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards"
or any successor policies), and confidential or proprietary information, and
you will effect sales of RSU Shares in accordance with such rules and
procedures as may be adopted from time to time (which may include, without
limitation, restrictions relating to the timing of sale requests, the manner
in which sales are executed, pricing method, consolidation or aggregation of
orders and volume limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your Short-Term RSUs, including those related to the sale of RSU Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery of, or Sell, RSU Shares. You will be deemed
to have represented and certified that you have complied with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement when RSU Shares are delivered to you, and
you receive payment in respect of Dividend Equivalent Rights;

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate, and the delivery
of RSU Shares or the payment of cash (including dividends and payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights) or other property may initially be made into and
held in that escrow account until such time as the Committee has received such
documentation as it may have requested or until the Committee has determined
that any other conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares, cash or
other property required by this Award Agreement have been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold Short-Term RSUs, from time to time, you may be
required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the terms of
the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraph 8(a)(iv). You
understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the Firm at the time
any certification is required will be deemed to be your current address, (B)
it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of any changes to your address to
ensure timely receipt of the certification materials, (C) you are responsible
for contacting the Firm to obtain such certification materials if not received
and (D) your failure to return properly completed certification materials by
the specified deadline (which includes your failure to timely return the
completed certification because you did not provide the Firm with updated
contact information) will result in the forfeiture of all of your Short-Term
RSUs and subject previously delivered amounts to repayment under Paragraph
8(a)(iv);

(vii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee, the SIP Committee or SIP
Administrators. If you disagree with a determination made by the Committee,
the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of their delegates or
designees and you wish to appeal such determination, you must submit a written
request to the SIP Committee for review within 180 days after the
determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal administrative remedies
( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution of that appeal) before
seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration pursuant to Paragraph 14 and
Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(viii) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition
to and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of
the Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to
you or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or
any other Award.

12. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph 12 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph 12 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The
Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
Short-Term RSUs may transfer some or all of their Short-Term RSUs through a
gift for no consideration to any immediate family member, a trust or other
estate planning vehicle approved by the Committee or SIP Committee in which
the recipient and/or the recipient's immediate family members in the aggregate
have 100% of the beneficial interest.

13. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph 16(h), the
obligation to deliver RSU Shares or to make payments under Dividend Equivalent
Rights under this Award Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the Plan, which
provides for the Firm's right to offset against such obligation any

outstanding amounts you owe to the Firm and any amounts the Committee deems
appropriate pursuant to any tax equalization policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

14. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN SECTION
3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE
EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT
ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND YOU ARISING OUT OF OR
RELATING TO OR CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY
SETTLED BY ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET
FORTH IN SECTION 3.17 OF THE PLAN; PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE
YOU FROM FILING A CHARGE WITH OR PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR
PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO THE SEC, THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE OR LOCAL
HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCY, AS WELL AS LAW ENFORCEMENT. 

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 11(f)(vii).

15. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

16. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 16 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 16 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
16 will govern.

(b) Delivery of RSU Shares will not be delayed beyond the date on which all
applicable conditions or restrictions on delivery of RSU Shares required by
this Agreement (including those specified in Paragraphs 6, 10(c) and 11 and
the consents and other items specified in Section 3.3 of the Plan) are
satisfied. To the extent that any portion of this Award is intended to satisfy
the requirements for short-term deferral treatment under Section 409A,
delivery for such portion will occur by the March 15 coinciding with the last
day of the applicable "short-term deferral" period described in Reg.
1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for the delivery of RSU Shares to be within the short-
term deferral exception unless, in order to permit all applicable conditions
or restrictions on delivery to be satisfied, the Committee elects, pursuant to
Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted in accordance with
Section 409A, to delay delivery of RSU Shares to a later date within the same
calendar year or to such later date as may be permitted under Section 409A,
including Reg. 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt, if the Award includes
a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg. 1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii),
your right to the series of installment payments will be treated as a right to
a series of separate payments and not as a right to a single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 11(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any securities,
other Awards or other property that the Firm may deliver in respect of your
Short-Term RSUs will not have the effect of deferring delivery or payment,
income inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture, beyond the date on
which such delivery, payment or inclusion would occur or such risk of
forfeiture would lapse, with respect to the RSU Shares that would otherwise
have been deliverable (unless the Committee elects a later date for this
purpose pursuant to Reg. 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted
under Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the subsequent
election provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg.
1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Notwithstanding the timing provisions of Paragraph 10(c), the delivery of
RSU Shares referred to therein will be made after the date of death and during
the calendar year that includes the date of death (or on such later date as
may be permitted under Section 409A).

(e) The timing of delivery or payment pursuant to Paragraph 10(a) will occur
on the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the termination of Employment occurs; provided ,
however , that, if you are a "specified employee" (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(i)(B) of the Code), delivery will occur on
the earlier of the Delivery Date or (to the extent required to avoid the
imposition of

additional tax under Section 409A) the date that is six months after your
termination of Employment (or, if the latter date is not during a Window
Period, the first trading day of the next Window Period). For purposes of
Paragraph 10(a), references in this Award Agreement to termination of
Employment mean a termination of Employment from the Firm (as defined by the
Firm) which is also a separation from service (as defined by the Firm in
accordance with Section 409A).

(f) Notwithstanding any provision of Paragraph 7 or Section 2.8.2 of the Plan
to the contrary, the Dividend Equivalent Rights with respect to each of your
Outstanding Short-Term RSUs will be paid to you within the calendar year that
includes the date of distribution of any corresponding regular cash dividends
paid by GS Inc. in respect of a share of Common Stock the record date for
which occurs on or after the Date of Grant. The payment will be in an amount
(less applicable withholding) equal to such regular dividend payment as would
have been made in respect of the RSU Shares underlying such Outstanding Short-
Term RSUs.

(g) The timing of delivery or payment referred to in Paragraph 10(b)(i) will
be the earlier of (i) the Delivery Date or (ii) a date that is within the
calendar year in which the Committee receives satisfactory documentation
relating to your Conflicted Employment, provided that such delivery or
payment will be made, and any Committee action referred to in Paragraph
10(b)(ii) will be taken, only at such time as, and if and to the extent that
it, as reasonably determined by the Firm, would not result in the imposition
of any additional tax to you under Section 409A.

(h) Paragraph 13 and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are
409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(i) Delivery of RSU Shares in respect of any Award may be made, if and to the
extent elected by the Committee, later than the Delivery Date or other date or
period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award that constitutes
409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later delivery is
permitted under Section 409A).

(j) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

17. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply and to limit the forfeitures and
repayments that result under Paragraphs 8 and 9.

18. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax consequences of this Award or the timing of delivery of RSU Shares will
not be an amendment that materially adversely affects your rights and
obligations under this Award Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement
will be in writing.

19. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

20. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities. In accordance
with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the forfeiture
and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 8 and 9) or the Plan prevents you from
providing information you reasonably believe to be true to the appropriate
governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial, administrative, or
other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of law or regulation;
making other disclosures that are protected under any applicable law or
regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any investigation or
proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the avoidance of doubt,
governmental authority includes federal, state and local government agencies
such as the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and any state or
local human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York State Division of Human
Rights, the New York City Commission on Human Rights, the California
Department of Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

[ U.K. M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 8 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your Short-Term RSUs and may require
repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered or paid
to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 9. As with the events
described in Paragraph 8, more than one event may apply, in no case will the
occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment obligations as a
result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm reserves the right to
(a) suspend payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights or delivery of RSU
Shares, (b) deliver any RSU Shares, dividends or payments under Dividend
Equivalent Rights into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 11(f)(v)
or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any
investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under
this have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Risk Event" (as defined below)
and the extent to which: (1) you participated in the Risk Event, (2) your
compensation for  may or may not have been adjusted to take into
account the risk associated with the Risk Event or your "Serious Misconduct"
(as defined below) and (3) your compensation may be adjusted for the year in
which the Risk Event or your Serious Misconduct is discovered.

(a) A Risk Event Occurs  . If a Risk Event occurs
 , (i) your rights in respect of all or a portion of your
Short-Term RSUs will terminate and no RSU Shares will be delivered in respect
of such Short-Term RSUs and (ii) you will be obligated immediately upon demand
therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of the Fair
Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend payments and payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights) delivered in respect of the Award (without
reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other
obligations) determined as of (A) the date the Risk Event occurred and (B) the
date that the repayment request is made.

(i) A " Risk Event " means there occurs a loss of 5% or more of firmwide
total capital from a reportable operational risk event determined in
accordance with the firmwide Reporting Operational Risk Events Policy.

(b) You Engage in Serious Misconduct . If you engage in
Serious Misconduct   , you will be obligated immediately
upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of
the Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend payments and
payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights) delivered in respect of the Award
(without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other
obligations) determined as of (i) the date the Serious Misconduct occurred and
(ii) the date that the repayment request is made.

(i) " Serious Misconduct " means that you engage in conduct that the Firm
reasonably considers, in its sole discretion, to be misconduct sufficient to
justify summary termination of employment under English law.

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by Paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Appendix (including your refusal to
remit payment) the parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with
Paragraph 14 of this Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole
means of resolution of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the
payment amount).]

[GSBE M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX 

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 8 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your Short-Term RSUs and may require
repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered or paid
to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 9. As with the events
described in Paragraph 8, more than one event may apply, in no case will the
occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment obligations as a
result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm reserves the right to
(a) suspend payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights or delivery of RSU
Shares, (b) deliver any RSU Shares, dividends or payments under Dividend
Equivalent Rights into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 11(f)(v)
or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any RSU Shares in connection with any
investigation of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under
this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Adjustment Event" (as defined
below).

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by this Appendix (including your refusal to remit payment) the
parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with Paragraph 14 of this
Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole means of resolution
of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the payment amount).

(a) An Adjustment Event Occurs . If an "Adjustment Event" (as
defined below) occurs , (i) your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your Short-Term RSUs will terminate and no RSU Shares will be
delivered in respect of such Short-Term RSUs, and (ii) you will be obligated
immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of
the greater of the Fair Market Value of the RSU Shares (plus any dividend
payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount
applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations) determined as of (A)
the date the Adjustment Event occurred and (B) the date that the repayment
request is made.

(i) " Adjustment Event " means that one of the following has occurred:

A. you significantly contributed to, or were responsible for, any conduct that
resulted in a loss of 0.75% or more of the total capital of GS Inc.;

B. a material regulatory sanction for the Firm comprising one or more of the
following:

a moratorium pursuant to sec. 46g of the German Banking Act,  

a measure in case of danger pursuant to sec. 46 of the German Banking Act,  

the revocation of appointment of a manager pursuant to sec. 36 German Banking
Act,  

a fine pursuant to sec. 56 of the German Banking Act or a  

threatened penalty payment, if the fine or penalty payment amounts to 0.75%
or more of the total capital of GS Inc.,  

the cancellation of the banking permit pursuant to sec. 35 of the German
Banking Act,  

an order to increase the capital requirements Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE
(GSBE) by at least 0.5% pursuant to sec. 10 of the German Banking Act,  

a measure in case of organizational deficiencies,  

a comparable regulatory order, or  

a material supervisory measure; or  

C. you acted in serious violation of relevant external or internal rules with
respect to suitability and conduct, provided that a violation is considered
serious if it suitable to justify a termination of employment for cause
pursuant to sec. 626 German Civil Code or a termination of employment for
misconduct pursuant to sec. 1 German Termination Protection Act.

The determination as to whether an Adjustment Event has occurred shall be made
by the Committee in its sole discretion.]

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) " Conflicted Employment " means your employment at any U.S. Federal,
state or local government, any non-U.S. government, any supranational or
international organization, any self-regulatory organization, or any agency or
instrumentality of any such government or organization, or any other employer
(other than an "Accounting Firm" within the meaning of SEC Rule 2-01(f)(2) of
Regulation S-X or any successor thereto) determined by the Committee, if, as a
result of such employment, your continued holding of any Outstanding Short-
Term RSUs would result in an actual or perceived conflict of interest.

(c) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(d) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(e) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan.

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the

"Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable, the ultimate parent entity that
directly or indirectly has beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule
13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such Rule is in effect on the date of the
adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more of the total voting power (in respect
of the election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity
other than a corporation) of the Surviving Entity (the "Parent Entity") is
represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS Inc. Securities") that were
outstanding immediately prior to such Reorganization or Sale (or, if
applicable, is represented by shares into which such GS Inc. Securities were
converted pursuant to such Reorganization or Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the
members of the board of directors (or similar officials in the case of an
entity other than a corporation) of the Parent Entity (or, if there is no
Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity) following the consummation of the
Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of the Board's approval of the
execution of the initial agreement providing for such Reorganization or Sale,
individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who either (A) were members of the
Board on the Effective Date or (B) became directors subsequent to the
Effective Date and whose election or nomination for election was approved by a
vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent Directors then on the Board
(either by a specific vote or by approval of GS Inc.'s proxy statement in
which such persons are named as nominees for director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(n) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(o) " Delivery Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a delivery date, provided , unless the Committee determines
otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if such date is not during
a Window Period, the first trading day of the first Window Period beginning
after such date.

(p) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(q) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 of the Plan.

(r) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(s) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(t) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(u) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(v) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(w) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(x) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP.

(y) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been forfeited,
cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the shares of Common
Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered or other
payments made.

(z) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(aa) " RSU Shares " means shares of Common Stock that underlie an RSU.

(bb) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(cc) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(dd) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(ee) " Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.

(ff) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain Outstanding. The fact that an
Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise indicate that the Grantee has
an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such Award, and such Award shall
remain subject to such terms, conditions and forfeiture provisions as may be
provided for in the Plan or in the Award Agreement.

(gg) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which
all employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common
Stock ( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.51 10 d192225dex1051.htm EX-10.51  EX-10.51

Exhibit 10.51

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

Y EAR-END PERFORMANCE-BASED RSU AWARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your award of performance-
based RSUs (your "Award" or "PSUs"). You should read carefully this entire
Award Agreement, which includes the Award Statement, any attached Appendix and
the signature card.

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph 16.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
number of PSUs subject to this Award, the Performance Period and the
Performance Goal applicable to your Award. It also contains the Determination
Date and [the] [any applicable] Settlement Date[s] for your Award and the [any
applicable] Transferability Date[s] for any Shares at Risk that may be
delivered to you in respect of any Settlement Amount that you may earn. The
number of PSUs on your Award Statement is not necessarily the number of PSUs
in respect of which the Settlement Amount will be earned, but is merely the
basis for determining the amount (if any) that will be delivered to you.

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR PSUS 

5. Vesting . Your PSUs are Vested. When a PSU is Vested, it means
only that your continued active Employment is not required to earn
delivery in respect of that PSU. Vesting does not mean you have a non-
forfeitable right to the Vested portion of your Award. The terms of this Award
Agreement (including conditions to delivery, satisfaction of the Performance
Goal and any applicable Transfer Restrictions) continue to apply to your
Award, and failure to meet such terms may result in the termination of this
Award (as a result of which no delivery in respect of such Vested PSUs would
be made) and you can still forfeit Vested PSUs and Shares at Risk.

P ERFORMANCE GOAL 

6. Performance . The Settlement Amount is dependent, and may vary
based, on achievement of the Performance Goal over the Performance Period. On
the Determination Date, the Firm will determine whether or not, and to what
extent, the Performance Goal for that Performance Period has been satisfied.
All your rights with respect to the Settlement Amount [(and any Dividend
Equivalent Payments)] are dependent on the extent to which the Performance
Goal is achieved, and any rights to delivery in respect of your Outstanding
PSUs immediately will terminate and no Settlement Amount will

be delivered in respect of such PSUs upon the Committee's determination, in
its sole discretion, that the Performance Goal has not been satisfied to the
extent necessary to result in delivery in respect of the PSUs.

S ETTLEMENT AMOUNT 

7. Settlement .

(a) In General. Subject to satisfaction of the terms of this Award,
including satisfaction of the Performance Goal, on the Settlement Date, you
will receive delivery (less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph
13(a)) of the Settlement Amount [and payment of any Dividend Equivalent
Payments] as further described in this Award Agreement and in your Award
Statement. Until such delivery [and payment], you have only the rights of a
general unsecured creditor and you do not have any rights as a shareholder of
GS Inc. with respect to either the PSUs or the Settlement Amount. Without
limiting the Committee's authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the
Firm may accelerate any Settlement Date by up to 30 days. 

(b) Form of Delivery. The Settlement Amount will be delivered on the
Settlement Date as follows:

(i) [% in the form of cash ].

(ii) [% in the form of Shares [at Risk] (by book entry credit to your
Account)].

(c) Shares at Risk.  percent of the Shares delivered to you in respect of
the Settlement Amount will be Shares at Risk subject to Transfer Restrictions
until the [applicable] Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement].
Any purported sale, exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation,
fractionalization, hedge or other disposition in violation of the Transfer
Restrictions on Shares at Risk will be void. Within 30 Business Days after the
Transferability Date listed on your Award Statement (or any other date on
which the Transfer Restrictions are to be removed), GS Inc. will remove the
Transfer Restrictions. The Committee or the SIP Committee may select multiple
dates within such 30-Business-Day period on which to remove Transfer
Restrictions for all or a portion of the Shares at Risk with the same
Transferability Date and all such dates will be treated as a single
Transferability Date for purposes of this Award.

[D IVIDEND EQUIVALENT RIGHTS] [DIVIDENDS] 

8. [  Dividend Equivalent Rights .] [  Dividends ].
[To the extent described in your Award Statement, each PSU will include a
Dividend Equivalent Right, which will be subject to the provisions of Section
2.8 of the Plan. Accordingly, for each of your Outstanding PSUs with respect
to which delivery is made under the Settlement Amount, you will be entitled to
payments under Dividend Equivalent Rights equal to any regular cash dividend
paid by GS Inc. in respect of a Share the record date for which occurs on or
after the Date of Grant. The payment to you of amounts under Dividend
Equivalent Rights (less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph
13(a)) is conditioned upon the delivery under the Settlement Amount in respect
of the PSUs to which such Dividend Equivalent Rights relate, and you will have
no right to receive any Dividend Equivalent Payments relating to PSUs for
which you do not receive delivery under the Settlement Amount (including,
without limitation, due to a failure to satisfy the Performance Goal).
Dividend Equivalent Payments will be paid on the Settlement Date.] [You will
be entitled to receive on a current basis any regular cash dividend paid in
respect of your Shares at Risk. The PSUs do not include Dividend Equivalent
Rights.]

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

9. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph 9 sets forth the
events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your PSUs and Shares at Risk
and may require repayment to the Firm of up to all amounts previously paid or
delivered to you under your PSUs in accordance with Paragraph 10. More than
one event may apply, and in no case will the occurrence of one event limit the
forfeiture and repayment obligations as a result of the occurrence of any
other event. In addition, the Firm reserves the right to (a) suspend delivery
of the Settlement Amount [and payment of any Dividend Equivalent Payments] or
release of Transfer Restrictions on Shares at Risk or (b) [pay cash][deliver
the Settlement Amount] (including Dividend Equivalent Payments or dividends)
[or deliver Shares at Risk] into an escrow account in accordance with
Paragraph 13(f)(v) [or (c) [apply Transfer Restrictions to any Shares] in
connection with any investigation of whether any of the events that result in
forfeiture under the Plan or this Paragraph 9 have occurred. Paragraph 12]
(relating to certain circumstances under which release of Transfer
Restrictions may be accelerated) provides for exceptions to one or more
provisions of this Paragraph 9. [The U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix
supplements this Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that result in
forfeiture of up to all of your PSUs and Shares at Risk and may require
repayment to the Firm as described in Paragraph 10 and the U.K. Material Risk
Taker Appendix.]

(a) PSUs Forfeited Upon Certain Events. If any of the following occurs, your
rights to all of your Outstanding PSUs will terminate, and no Settlement
Amount will be delivered in respect thereof, as may be further described
below:

(i) You Associate With a Covered Enterprise. You Associate With a Covered
Enterprise during the Performance Period.

(ii) You Solicit Clients or Employees, Interfere with Client or Employee
Relationships or Participate in the Hiring of Employees. Before the
[applicable] Settlement Date, either:

(A) you, in any manner, directly or indirectly, (1) Solicit any Client to
transact business with a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain from doing
any business with the Firm, (2) interfere with or damage (or attempt to
interfere with or damage) any relationship between the Firm and any Client,
(3) Solicit any person who is an employee of the Firm to resign from the Firm,
(4) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or accept employment (or
other association) with any person or entity other than the Firm or (5)
participate in the hiring of any Selected Firm Personnel by any person or
entity other than the Firm (including, without limitation, participating in
the identification of individuals for potential hire, and participating in any
hiring decision), whether as an employee or consultant or otherwise, or

(B) Selected Firm Personnel are Solicited, hired or accepted into partnership,
membership or similar status by any entity where you have, or will have,
direct or indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm Personnel,
unless the Committee determines that you were not involved in such
Solicitation, hiring or acceptance.

(iii) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(iv) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before the [applicable]
Settlement Date.

(v) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the [applicable] Settlement Date, you failed to meet, in any
respect, any obligation under any

agreement with the Firm, or any agreement entered into in connection with your
Employment or this Award, including the Firm's notice period requirement
applicable to you, any offer letter, employment agreement or any shareholders'
agreement relating to the Firm. Your failure to pay or reimburse the Firm, on
demand, for any amount you owe to the Firm will constitute (A) failure to meet
an obligation you have under an agreement, regardless of whether such
obligation arises under a written agreement, and/or (B) a material violation
of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(vi) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(vii) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You
attempt to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in
any manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 16 or Section 3.17 of the
Plan, or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
13(f)(viii).

(viii) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(ix) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of your Outstanding PSUs.

(x) GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. Before the
[applicable] Settlement Date, GS Inc. fails to maintain the required "Minimum
Tier 1 Capital Ratio" as defined under Federal Reserve Board Regulations
applicable to GS Inc. for a period of 90 consecutive business days.

(xi) GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. Before the [applicable]
Settlement Date, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the FDIC
makes a written recommendation under Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority)
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for the
appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of GS Inc. based on a determination that
GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of default."

(xii) [Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. GS Inc. is
required to prepare an accounting restatement due to GS Inc.'s material
noncompliance, as a result of misconduct, with any financial reporting
requirement under the securities laws as described in Section 304(a) of
Sarbanes-Oxley; provided , however , that your rights with respect to the
PSUs will only be terminated to the same extent that would be required under
Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief executive officer" or
"chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of whether you actually hold
such position at the relevant time).]

(b) Shares at Risk Forfeited upon Certain Events. To the extent you receive
delivery of Shares at Risk in connection with any Settlement Amount, if any of
the following occurs your rights to all of your Shares at Risk will terminate
and your Shares at Risk will be cancelled, in each case, as may be further
described below:

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before the [applicable]
Transferability Date.

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the [applicable] Transferability Date, you failed to meet, in any
respect, any obligation under any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement
entered into in connection with your Employment or this Award, including the
Firm's notice period requirement applicable to you, any offer letter,
employment agreement or any shareholders' agreement relating to the Firm. Your
failure to pay or reimburse the Firm, on demand, for any amount you owe to the
Firm will constitute (A) failure to meet an obligation you have under an
agreement, regardless of whether such obligation arises under a written
agreement and/or (B) a material violation of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 16 or Section 3.17 of the Plan,
or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted your
internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(viii).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Shares at Risk; provided , however ,
that your rights will only be terminated in respect of the Shares at Risk that
are replaced, substituted for or otherwise considered by such other entity in
making its grant.

(viii) [Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. GS Inc. is
required to prepare an accounting restatement due to GS Inc.'s material
noncompliance, as a result of misconduct, with any financial reporting
requirement under the securities laws as described in Section 304(a) of
Sarbanes-Oxley; provided , however , that your rights will only be
terminated in respect of Shares at Risk to the same extent that would be
required under Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief
executive officer" or "chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of
whether you actually hold such position at the relevant time).]

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

10. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award .

(a) Repayment, Generally. If the Committee determines that any term of this
Award was not satisfied, you will be required, immediately upon demand
therefor, to repay to the Firm the following:

(i) Any Settlement Amount (including any Shares at Risk) for which the terms
(including the terms for delivery) of the related PSUs were not satisfied, in
accordance with Section 2.6.3 of the Plan.

(ii) Any Shares at Risk for which the terms (including the terms for the
release of Transfer Restrictions) were not satisfied, in accordance with
Section 2.5.3 of the Plan.

(iii) [Any Shares that were delivered (but not subject to Transfer
Restrictions) at the same time any Shares at Risk that are cancelled or
required to be repaid were delivered.]

(iv) [Any Dividend Equivalent Payments for which the terms were not satisfied
(including any such payments made in respect of PSUs that are forfeited or any
Settlement Amount that is required to be repaid), in accordance with Section
2.8.3 of the Plan.]

(v) Any dividends paid in respect of any [delivered Shares (including] Shares
at Risk[)] that are cancelled or required to be repaid.

(vi) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any PSUs, Settlement Amount (including Shares at Risk, dividend
payments or [Dividend Equivalent Payments] that are forfeited or required to
be repaid.

(b) Repayment Upon Materially Inaccurate Financial Statements. If any
delivery is made under this Award Agreement based on materially inaccurate
financial statements (which includes, but is not limited to, statements of
earnings, revenues or gains) or other materially inaccurate performance
criteria, you will be obligated to repay to the Firm, immediately upon demand
therefor, any excess amount delivered, as determined by the Committee in its
sole discretion.

(c) [Repayment Upon Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. If
an event described in Paragraphs 9(a)(xii) and 9(b)(viii) (relating to a
requirement under Sarbanes-Oxley that GS Inc. prepare an accounting
restatement) occurs, any Settlement Amount [(including Shares at Risk)],
dividend payments, Dividend Equivalent Payments, cash or other property
delivered, paid or withheld in respect of this Award will be subject to
repayment as described in Paragraph 10(a) to the same extent that would be
required under Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief
executive officer" or "chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of
whether you actually hold such position at the relevant time).]

T ERMINATIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 

11. PSUs and Termination of Employment [or Death] .

(a) Employment Termination Generally. Unless the Committee determines
otherwise, if your Employment terminates for any reason or you are otherwise
no longer actively Employed with the Firm (which includes off-premises notice
periods, "garden leaves," pay in lieu of notice or any other similar status),
the Performance Goal applicable to your Outstanding PSUs will continue to
apply and the determination of the Settlement Amount will continue to be
subject to whether or not, and to what extent, the Performance Goal has been
achieved, in each case, as provided in Paragraph 6. All other terms of this
Award Agreement, including the forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9
and 10 [and the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix], continue to apply.

(b) [Death. If you die before the Settlement Date, the representative of
your estate will, on the Settlement Date, receive delivery of the Settlement
Amount and payment of the Dividend Equivalent

Payments that, in each case, would have otherwise been made pursuant to
Paragraph 6 and any Transfer Restrictions on Shares at Risk will cease to
apply in accordance with Paragraph 12(b), after such documentation as may be
requested by the Committee is provided to the Committee. All other terms of
this Award Agreement, including the forfeiture and repayment events in
Paragraphs 9 and 10 [and the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix], continue to
apply.

12. Accelerated Release of Transfer Restrictions on Shares at Risk in the
Event of a ]Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control or Death .
[To the extent you receive delivery of Shares at Risk in connection with any
Settlement Amount,] [I][i]n the event of your Qualifying Termination After a
Change in Control or death, each as described below, your Shares at Risk [(and
delivery of your Settlement Amount in the case of death in certain
circumstances)] will be treated as described in this Paragraph 12, and, except
as set forth in Paragraph 12(a), all other terms of this Award Agreement,
including the other forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10
[and the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix], continue to apply. [In each case,
the Performance Goal applicable to your Outstanding PSUs will continue to
apply and the determination of the Settlement Amount will continue to be
subject to whether or not, and to what extent, the Performance Goal has been
achieved, in each case, as provided in Paragraph 6.]

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a Change in Control, any Transfer Restrictions will cease to
apply to your Shares at Risk. In addition, the forfeiture events in Paragraph
9 will not apply to your Shares at Risk.

(b) Death. If you die, any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply to your
Shares at Risk as soon as practicable after the date of death and after such
documentation as may be requested by the Committee is provided to the
Committee[.][, unless prohibited by applicable law or regulation:

(i) If you die prior to the Determination Date or an applicable Settlement
Date, the representative of your estate will receive delivery of any
undelivered portion of the Settlement Amount that would have otherwise been
made pursuant to Paragraph 6 as soon as practicable after the later of the
date of death and the Determination Date.

(ii) Any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply to your Shares at Risk.]

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

13. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
the Settlement Amount is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable
withholding taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes
the Firm deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to
you. In addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its
sole discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion
of any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you
or the Firm in connection with the grant or [payment][delivery] of this Award
by requiring you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or
through payroll deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from
the Firm's executing a sale of Shares delivered to you pursuant to this Award.
In no event, however, does this Paragraph 13(a) give you any discretion to
determine or affect the timing of delivery of the Settlement Amount or the
timing of payment of tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property in Respect of the Settlement
Amount. In accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole
discretion of the Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the Settlement
Amount, the Firm may deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the
Plan or other property, and all references in this Award Agreement to delivery
of the Settlement Amount will include such deliveries of cash, other
securities, other awards under the Plan or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. Any amounts delivered
in respect of the Settlement Amount[, including Shares at Risk,] may be
rounded to avoid fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your PSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party to any
shareholders' agreement to which other similarly situated employees ( e.g.,
employees with a similar title or position) of the Firm are required to be a
party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Shares. GS Inc. may
affix to Certificates representing Shares any legend that the Committee
determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any restrictions
to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc. may advise
the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in Shares and hedging or pledging Shares and equity-based compensation or
other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with Respect
to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards" or any
successor policies), and confidential or proprietary information, and you will
effect sales of Shares in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be
adopted from time to time (which may include, without limitation, restrictions
relating to the timing of sale requests, the manner in which sales are
executed, pricing method, consolidation or aggregation of orders and volume
limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your Award, including those related to the sale of Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery. You will be deemed to have represented and
certified that you have complied with all of the terms of the Plan and this
Award Agreement when any Settlement Amount [and Dividend Equivalent Payments]
[is][are] delivered to you, and you request the sale of Shares following the
release of Transfer Restrictions on Shares at Risk;

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate,

and the Settlement Amount may initially be delivered and any [Dividend
Equivalent Payments and] dividends may initially be [paid][delivered] into and
held in that escrow account until such time as the Committee has received such
documentation as it may have requested or until the Committee has determined
that any other conditions or restrictions on deliveries required by this Award
Agreement have been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold PSUs [or Shares at Risk], from time to time, you
may be required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the
terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraphs 9(a)(vi)
and 9(b)(iv). You understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the
Firm at the time any certification is required will be deemed to be your
current address, (B) it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of any
changes to your address to ensure timely receipt of the certification
materials, (C) you are responsible for contacting the Firm to obtain such
certification materials if not received and (D) your failure to return
properly completed certification materials by the specified deadline (which
includes your failure to timely return the completed certification because you
did not provide the Firm with updated contact information) will result in the
forfeiture of all of your PSUs or Shares at Risk and subject previously
delivered amounts to repayment under Paragraphs 9(a)(vi) and 9(b)(iv);

(vii) You Authorize the Firm to Register, in Its or Its Designee's Name, Any
Shares at Risk and Sell, Assign or Transfer Any Forfeited Shares at Risk. You
are granting to the Firm the full power and authority to register any Shares
at Risk in its or its designee's name and authorizing the Firm or its designee
to sell, assign or transfer any Shares at Risk if you forfeit your Shares at
Risk;

(viii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee. If you disagree with a determination
made by the Committee, the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of
their delegates or designees and you wish to appeal such determination, you
must submit a written request to the SIP Committee for review within 180 days
after the determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal
administrative remedies ( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution
of that appeal) before seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration
pursuant to Paragraph 16 and Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(ix) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition to
and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of the
Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to you
or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or any
other Award.

14. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph 14 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph 14 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The
Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
PSUs and Shares at Risk may transfer some or all of their PSUs or Shares at
Risk (which will continue to be subject to Transfer Restrictions until the
Transferability Date) through a gift for no consideration to any immediate
family member, a trust or other estate planning vehicle approved by the
Committee or SIP Committee in which the recipient and/or the recipient's
immediate family members in the aggregate have 100% of the beneficial
interest.

15. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph 18(d), the
obligation to deliver the Settlement Amount, pay dividends [or Dividend
Equivalent Payments] or release Transfer Restrictions under this Award
Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the Plan, which provides for the Firm's
right to

offset against such obligation any outstanding amounts you owe to the Firm and
any amounts the Committee deems appropriate pursuant to any tax equalization
policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

16. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN SECTION
3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE
EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT
ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND YOU ARISING OUT OF OR
RELATING TO OR CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY
SETTLED BY ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET
FORTH IN SECTION 3.17 OF THE PLAN; PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE
YOU FROM FILING A CHARGE WITH OR PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR
PROCEEDING CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO THE SEC, THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE OR LOCAL
HUMAN RIGHTS AGENCY, AS WELL AS LAW ENFORCEMENT. 

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
13(f)(viii).

17. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

18. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 18 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 18 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
18 will govern.

(b) Settlement will not be delayed beyond the date on which all applicable
conditions or restrictions on settlement in respect of your PSUs required by
this Award Agreement (including the consents and other items specified in
Section 3.3 of the Plan) are satisfied. To the extent that any portion of this
Award is intended to satisfy the requirements for short-term deferral
treatment under Section 409A, settlement in respect of such portion will occur
by the March 15 coinciding with the last day of the applicable "short-term
deferral" period described in Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for settlement to
be within the short-term deferral exception unless, in order to permit all
applicable conditions or restrictions on settlement to be satisfied, the
Committee elects, pursuant to Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may
be permitted in accordance with Section 409A, to delay settlement to a later
date within the same calendar year or to such later date as may be permitted
under Section 409A, including Reg. § 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt,
if the Award includes a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg.
§ 1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii), your right to the series of installment payments will
be treated as a right to a series of separate payments and not as a right to a
single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 13(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any delivery or
payment [(including in the form of Shares at Risk or other property)] that the
Firm may make in respect of your PSUs will not have the effect of deferring
payment, delivery, income inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture,
beyond the date on which such payment, delivery or inclusion would occur or
such risk of forfeiture would lapse, with respect to the payment or delivery
that would otherwise have been made (unless the Committee elects a later date
for this purpose pursuant to Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may
be permitted under Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the
subsequent election provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. §
1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Paragraph 15 and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are
409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(e) Settlement in respect of any portion of the Award may be made, if and to
the extent elected by the Committee, later than the relevant Settlement Date
or other date or period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award
that constitutes 409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later
payment or delivery, as applicable, is permitted under Section 409A).

(f) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

19. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply, to limit the

forfeitures and repayments that result under Paragraphs 9 and 10 and to remove
Transfer Restrictions before the [applicable] Transferability Date.

20. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that , notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax consequences of this Award or the timing of delivery will not be an
amendment that materially adversely affects your rights and obligations under
this Award Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement will be in
writing.

21. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(i) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(ii) words denoting any gender include all genders and (iii) the words
"include," "includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the
words "without limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the
purpose of convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the
construction of the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to
any specific Plan provision will not be construed as limiting the
applicability of any other Plan provision.

22. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the
forfeiture and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 9 and 10) or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority includes federal, state and local
government agencies such as the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission and any state or local human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York
State Division of Human Rights, the New York City Commission on Human Rights,
the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law
enforcement

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

[ U.K. M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX

Q UALITATIVE OVERLAY REDUCTION 

In addition to and without limiting the Firm's rights under the forfeiture and
repayment provisions set forth in Paragraphs 9 and 10 or in the "Forfeiture
and Repayment" section below, the Committee may determine to reduce the
Settlement Amount as described in the section entitled "Qualitative Overlay
Reduction" in the Award Statement.

F ORFEITURE AND REPAYMENT 

This section supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your PSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend delivery of Shares or release of Transfer
Restrictions, (b) deliver any Shares or dividends into an escrow account in
accordance with Paragraph 13(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any
Shares in connection with any investigation of whether any of the events that
result in forfeiture under this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Loss Event" (as defined below)
or "Risk Event" (as defined below) and the extent to which: (1) you
participated in the Loss Event or Risk Event, (2) your compensation for
 may or may not have been adjusted to take into account the risk
associated with the Loss Event, Risk Event, your "Serious Misconduct" (as
defined below) or the Serious Misconduct of a "Supervised Employee" (as
defined below) and (3) your compensation may be adjusted for the year in which
the Loss Event, Risk Event, your Serious Misconduct or a Supervised Employee's
Serious Misconduct is discovered.

(a) A Loss Event Occurs Prior to Delivery. If a Loss Event occurs prior to
the delivery of any portion of the Settlement Amount, your rights in respect
of all or a portion of your PSUs which are scheduled to deliver on the next
Settlement Date immediately following the date that the Loss Event is
identified (or, if not practicable, then the next following Settlement Date)
will terminate, and no Shares will be delivered in respect of such PSUs.

(i) A " Loss Event " means (A) an annual pre-tax loss at GS Inc. or (B)
annual negative revenues in one or more reporting segments as disclosed in the
Firm's Form 10-K other than the Asset Management segment, or annual negative
revenues in the Asset Management segment of $5 billion or more, provided in
either case that you are employed in a business within such reporting segment.

(b) A Risk Event Occurs  . If a Risk Event occurs   ,
(i) your rights in respect of all or a portion of your PSUs will terminate and
no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect of such PSUs, (ii) your
rights to all or a portion of any Shares at Risk will terminate and such
Shares at Risk will be cancelled and (iii) you will be obligated immediately
upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of
the Fair Market Value of the Shares (plus any dividend payments) delivered in
respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax
withholding or other obligations)

determined as of (A) the date the Risk Event occurred and (B) the date that
the repayment request is made.

(i) A " Risk Event " means there occurs a loss of 5% or more of firmwide
total capital from a reportable operational risk event determined in
accordance with the firmwide Reporting Operational Risk Events Policy.

(c) You Engage in Serious Misconduct  . If you engage in Serious
Misconduct  , you will be obligated immediately upon demand
therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of the Fair
Market Value of the Shares (plus any dividend payments) delivered in respect
of the Award (without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy tax
withholding or other obligations) determined as of (i) the date the Serious
Misconduct occurred and (ii) the date that the repayment request is made.

(i) " Serious Misconduct " means that you engage in conduct that the Firm
reasonably considers, in its sole discretion, to be misconduct sufficient to
justify summary termination of employment under English law.

(d) A Supervised Employee Engages in Serious Misconduct. If the Committee
determines that it is appropriate to hold you accountable in whole or in part
for Serious Misconduct related to compliance, control or risk that occurred
during  by a Supervised Employee, your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your PSUs will terminate and no Settlement Amount will be delivered
in respect of such PSUs and your rights to all or a portion of any Shares at
Risk will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be cancelled.

(i) " Supervised Employee " means an individual with respect to whom the
Committee determines you had supervisory responsibility as a result of direct
or indirect reporting lines or your management responsibility for an office,
division or business.

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Appendix (including your refusal to
remit payment) the parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with
Paragraph 16 of this Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole
means of resolution of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the
payment amount).]

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) " Associate With a Covered Enterprise " means that you (i) form, or
acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit participation
interest in, any Covered Enterprise or (ii) associate in any capacity
(including association as an officer, employee, partner, director, consultant,
agent or advisor) with any Covered Enterprise. Associate With a Covered
Enterprise may include, as determined in the discretion of the Committee, (i)
becoming the subject of any publicly available announcement or report of a
pending or future association with a Covered Enterprise and (ii) unpaid
associations, including an association in contemplation of future employment.
"Association With a Covered Enterprise" will have its correlative meaning.

(c) " Covered Enterprise " means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or that the Firm
reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages in,
holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any
other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage
("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities include any
activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage,
irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in furtherance of an
advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
any product or service, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in any activity, in any case, associated
with investment banking; public or private finance; lending; financial
advisory services; private investing for anyone other than you or your family
members (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any type of proprietary
investing or trading); private wealth management; private banking; consumer or
commercial cash management; consumer, digital or commercial banking; merchant
banking; asset, portfolio or hedge fund management; insurance or reinsurance
underwriting or brokerage; property management; or securities, futures,
commodities, energy, derivatives, currency or digital asset brokerage, sales,
lending, custody, clearance, settlement or trading. An enterprise that offers,
holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities is a Covered
Enterprise , irrespective of whether the enterprise is a customer, client or
counterparty of the Firm or is otherwise associated with the Firm and, because
the Firm is a global enterprise, irrespective of where the Covered Enterprise
is physically located.

(d) " Determination Date " means the date specified on your Award Statement
as the date on which the Committee will determine whether or not, and to what
extent, the Performance Goal was achieved for the Performance Period.

(e) [" Dividend Equivalent Payments " means any payments made in respect of
Dividend Equivalent Rights.]

(f) " FDIC " means the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any
successor thereto.

(g) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(h) " Performance Goal " means the performance goal determined by the
Committee that is specified on your Award Statement.

(i) " Performance Period " means the performance period determined by the
Committee that is specified on your Award Statement.

(j) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(k) [" Sarbanes-Oxley " means the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended.]

(l) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

(m) " Selected Firm Personnel " means any individual who is or in the three
months preceding the conduct prohibited by Paragraph 9(a)(ii) was (i) a Firm
employee or consultant with whom you personally worked while employed by the
Firm, (ii) a Firm employee or consultant who, at any time during the year
preceding the date of the termination of your Employment, worked in the same
division in which you worked or (iii) an Advisory Director, a Managing
Director or a Senior Advisor of the Firm.

(n) " Settlement Amount " means an amount deliverable to you in respect of
your PSUs (determined as described in the Award Statement).

(o) " Settlement Date " means each date specified on your Award Statement as
the date on which the Settlement Amount will be delivered, provided , unless
the Committee determines otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if
such date is not during a Window Period, the first trading day of the first
Window Period beginning after such date.

(p) " Share " means a share of Common Stock.

(q) " Shares at Risk " means Shares that are subject to Transfer
Restrictions.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan:

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the "Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable,
the ultimate parent entity that directly or indirectly has beneficial

ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such
Rule is in effect on the date of the adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more
of the total voting power (in respect of the election of directors, or similar
officials in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the Surviving
Entity (the "Parent Entity") is represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS
Inc. Securities") that were outstanding immediately prior to such
Reorganization or Sale (or, if applicable, is represented by shares into which
such GS Inc. Securities were converted pursuant to such Reorganization or
Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the members of the board of directors (or
similar officials in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the
Parent Entity (or, if there is no Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity)
following the consummation of the Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of
the Board's approval of the execution of the initial agreement providing for
such Reorganization or Sale, individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who
either (A) were members of the Board on the Effective Date or (B) became
directors subsequent to the Effective Date and whose election or nomination
for election was approved by a vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent
Directors then on the Board (either by a specific vote or by approval of GS
Inc.'s proxy statement in which such persons are named as nominees for
director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Competitive Enterprise " means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity; (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in any entity that engages in any activity or
(iii) is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned by, or a significant
interest in which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned or controlled
by, any entity that engages in any activity that, in any case, competes or
will compete anywhere with any activity in which the Firm is engaged. The
activities covered by this definition include, without limitation: financial
services such as investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than the
Grantee and members of the Grantee's family (including for the avoidance of
doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading); private wealth
management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash management; consumer,
digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge
fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property
management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency
or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or
trading.

(n) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(o) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(p) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(q) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 of the Plan.

(r) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(s) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(t) " Extended Absence " means the Grantee's inability to perform for six
(6) continuous months, due to illness, injury or pregnancy-related
complications, substantially all the essential duties of the Grantee's
occupation, as determined by the Committee.

(u) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(v) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(w) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(x) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(y) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP.

(z) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been forfeited,
cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the shares of Common
Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered or other
payments made.

(aa) " Restricted Share " means a share of Common Stock delivered under the
Plan that is subject to Transfer Restrictions, forfeiture provisions and/or
other terms and conditions specified herein and in the Restricted Share Award
Agreement or other applicable Award Agreement. All references to Restricted
Shares include "Shares at Risk."

(bb) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(cc) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(dd) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(ee) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(ff) " Solicit " means any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(gg) [" Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.]

(hh) [" Transferability Date " means the date Transfer Restrictions on a
Restricted Share will be released. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date, GS Inc. shall take, or shall cause to be
taken, such steps as may be necessary to remove Transfer Restrictions.]

(ii) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain Outstanding. The fact that an
Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise indicate that the Grantee has
an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such Award, and such Award shall
remain subject to such terms, conditions and forfeiture provisions as may be
provided for in the Plan or in the Award Agreement.

(jj) " Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which
all employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common
Stock ( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.52 11 d192225dex1052.htm EX-10.52  EX-10.52

Exhibit 10.52

T HE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC. 

A WARD 

This Award Agreement, together with The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated
Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "Plan"), governs your  of
performance-based RSUs (your "Award" or "PSUs"). You should read carefully
this entire Award Agreement, which includes the Award Statement, any attached
Appendix and the signature card.

A CCEPTANCE 

1. You Must Decide Whether to Accept this Award Agreement . To be
eligible to receive your Award, you must by the date specified (a) 
open and activate an Account and (b)  agree to all the terms of your
Award by executing the related signature card in accordance with its
instructions. By executing the signature card, you confirm your agreement to
 all of the terms of this Award Agreement, including the arbitration
and choice of forum provisions in Paragraph 17.

D OCUMENTS THAT GOVERN YOUR AWARD; DEFINITIONS 

2. The Plan . Your Award is granted under the Plan, and the Plan's
terms apply to, and are a part of, this Award Agreement.

3. Your Award Statement . The Award Statement delivered to you
contains some of your Award's specific terms. For example, it contains the
number of PSUs subject to this Award, the Performance Period and the
Performance Goal[s] applicable to your Award. It also contains the Vesting
Date[s], the Determination Date and the Settlement Date for your Award and the
Transferability Date for any Shares at Risk that may be delivered to you in
respect of any Settlement Amount that you may earn. The number of PSUs on your
Award Statement is not necessarily the number of PSUs in respect of which the
Settlement Amount will be earned, but is merely the basis for determining the
amount (if any) that will be delivered to you.

4. Definitions . Unless otherwise defined herein, including in the
Definitions Appendix or any other Appendix, capitalized terms have the
meanings provided in the Plan.

V ESTING OF YOUR PSUS 

5. Vesting . On each Vesting Date listed on your Award Statement,
you will become Vested in the amount of Outstanding PSUs listed next to that
date. When a PSU becomes Vested, it means only that your continued active
Employment is not required to earn delivery in respect of that PSU. Vesting
does not mean you have a non-forfeitable right to the Vested portion of your
Award. The terms of this Award Agreement (including conditions to delivery,
satisfaction of the Performance Goal[s] and any applicable Transfer
Restrictions) continue to apply to your Award, and failure to meet such terms
may result in the termination of this Award (as a result of which no delivery
in respect of such Vested PSUs would be made) and you can still forfeit Vested
PSUs and Shares at Risk.

P ERFORMANCE GOAL[S] 

6. Performance . The Settlement Amount is dependent, and may vary
based, on achievement of the Performance Goal[s] over the Performance Period.
On the Determination Date, the Firm will determine whether or not, and to what
extent, the Performance Goal[s] for that Performance Period [has][have] been
satisfied. All your rights with respect to the Settlement Amount [(and any
Dividend Equivalent Payments)] are dependent on the extent to which the
Performance Goal[s] [is][are]

achieved, and any rights to delivery in respect of your Outstanding PSUs
immediately will terminate and no Settlement Amount will be delivered in
respect of such PSUs upon the Committee's determination, in its sole
discretion, that the Performance Goal[s] [has][have] not been satisfied to the
extent necessary to result in delivery in respect of the PSUs.

S ETTLEMENT AMOUNT 

7. Settlement .

(a) In General. Subject to satisfaction of the terms of this Award,
including satisfaction of the Performance Goal[s], on the Settlement Date, you
will receive delivery (less applicable withholding as described in Paragraph
14(a)) of the Settlement Amount [and payment of any Dividend Equivalent
Payments] as further described in this Award Agreement and in your Award
Statement. Until such delivery and payment, you have only the rights of a
general unsecured creditor and you do not have any rights as a shareholder of
GS Inc. with respect to either the PSUs or the Settlement Amount. Without
limiting the Committee's authority under Section 1.3.2(h) of the Plan, the
Firm may accelerate any Settlement Date by up to 30 days.

(b) Form of Delivery. The Settlement Amount will be delivered in the form of
Shares (by book entry credit to your Account).

(c) Shares at Risk.  percent of the Shares delivered to you in respect of
the Settlement Amount will be Shares at Risk subject to Transfer Restrictions
until the [applicable] Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement].
Any purported sale, exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation,
fractionalization, hedge or other disposition in violation of the Transfer
Restrictions on Shares at Risk will be void. Within 30 Business Days after the
[applicable] Transferability Date [listed on your Award Statement] (or any
other date on which the Transfer Restrictions are to be removed), GS Inc. will
remove the Transfer Restrictions. The Committee or the SIP Committee may
select multiple dates within such 30-Business-Day period on which to remove
Transfer Restrictions for all or a portion of the Shares at Risk with the same
Transferability Date listed on the Award Statement, and all such dates will be
treated as a single Transferability Date for purposes of this Award.

(d) [ Voluntary Deferral of Settlement Date. Subject to any procedures and
agreement terms adopted by the Committee to govern any such election, at least
12 months prior to the last day of the original Performance Period set forth
on the Award Statement (or such other date as may be permitted under Section
409A), you may make an irrevocable election to defer the Settlement Date[s]
(and the delivery of the Settlement Amount [and payment of any Dividend
Equivalent Payments, each] determined as of the Determination Date) until the
fifth anniversary of the originally scheduled Settlement Date[s] set forth on
the Award Statement (or such other date as may be permitted by Section 409A).
Any such election will be in accordance with the subsequent election
provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. § 1.409A-2(b) or
otherwise as may be permitted under Section 409A.]

[D IVIDEND EQUIVALENT RIGHTS][DIVIDENDS] 

8. [Dividend Equivalent Rights][Dividends] . [To the extent
described in your Award Statement, each PSU will include a Dividend Equivalent
Right, which will be subject to the provisions of Section 2.8 of the Plan.
Accordingly, for each of your Outstanding PSUs with respect to which delivery
is made under the Settlement Amount, you will be entitled to payments under
Dividend Equivalent Rights equal to any regular cash dividend paid by GS Inc.
in respect of a Share the record date for which occurs on or after the Date of
Grant. The payment to you of amounts under Dividend Equivalent Rights (less

applicable withholding as described in Paragraph 14(a)) is conditioned upon
the delivery under the Settlement Amount in respect of the PSUs to which such
Dividend Equivalent Rights relate, and you will have no right to receive any
Dividend Equivalent Payments relating to PSUs for which you do not receive
delivery under the Settlement Amount (including, without limitation, due to a
failure to satisfy the Performance Goal[s]). Dividend Equivalent Payments will
be paid on the Settlement Date.] [You will be entitled to receive on a current
basis any regular cash dividend paid in respect of your Shares at Risk. The
PSUs do not include Dividend Equivalent Rights.]

F ORFEITURE OF YOUR AWARD 

9. How You May Forfeit Your Award . This Paragraph 9 sets forth the
events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your PSUs and Shares at Risk
and may require repayment to the Firm of up to all amounts previously paid or
delivered to you under your PSUs in accordance with Paragraph 10. More than
one event may apply, and in no case will the occurrence of one event limit the
forfeiture and repayment obligations as a result of the occurrence of any
other event. In addition, the Firm reserves the right to (a) suspend vesting
of Outstanding PSUs, delivery of the Settlement Amount [and payment of any
Dividend Equivalent Payments] or release of Transfer Restrictions on Shares at
Risk, (b) deliver the Settlement Amount, [any Dividend Equivalent Payments] or
dividends into an escrow account in accordance with Paragraph 14(f)(v) or (c)
apply Transfer Restrictions to any Shares in connection with any investigation
of whether any of the events that result in forfeiture under the Plan or this
Paragraph 9 have occurred. Paragraph 12 (relating to [certain circumstances
under which you will not forfeit your unvested PSUs upon Employment
termination][Extended Absence and Qualified Termination]) and Paragraph 13
(relating to [certain circumstances under which vesting and/or release of
Transfer Restrictions may be accelerated][Change in Control and death])
provide for exceptions to one or more provisions of this Paragraph 9. [The
U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix supplements this Paragraph 9 and sets forth
additional events that result in forfeiture of up to all of your PSUs and
Shares at Risk and may require repayment to the Firm as described in Paragraph
10 and the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix.]

(a) Unvested PSUs Forfeited if Your Employment Terminates. If your
Employment terminates for any reason or you are otherwise no longer actively
Employed with the Firm (which includes off-premises notice periods, "garden
leaves," pay in lieu of notice or any other similar status), your rights to
your Outstanding PSUs that are not Vested will terminate, and no Settlement
Amount will be delivered in respect thereof.

(b) Vested and Unvested PSUs Forfeited Upon Certain Events. If any of the
following occurs, your rights to all of your Outstanding PSUs (whether or not
Vested) will terminate, and no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect
thereof, as may be further described below:

(i) You Associate With a Covered Enterprise. You Associate With a Covered
Enterprise during the Performance Period.

(ii) You Solicit Clients or Employees, Interfere with Client or Employee
Relationships or Participate in the Hiring of Employees. Before the [First]
Settlement Date [listed on your Award Statement], either:

(A) you, in any manner, directly or indirectly, (1) Solicit any Client to
transact business with a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain from doing
any business with the Firm, (2) interfere with or damage (or attempt to
interfere with or damage) any relationship between the Firm and any Client,
(3) Solicit any person who is an employee of the Firm to resign from the Firm,
(4) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or accept employment (or
other association) with any person or

entity other than the Firm or (5) participate in the hiring of any Selected
Firm Personnel by any person or entity other than the Firm (including, without
limitation, participating in the identification of individuals for potential
hire, and participating in any hiring decision), whether as an employee or
consultant or otherwise, or

(B) Selected Firm Personnel are Solicited, hired or accepted into partnership,
membership or similar status by any entity where you have, or will have,
direct or indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm Personnel,
unless the Committee determines that you were not involved in such
Solicitation, hiring or acceptance.

(iii) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(iv) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause
[(including, for the avoidance of doubt, "Serious Misconduct" as defined in
the U.K. Material Risk Taker Appendix)] has occurred before the [applicable]
Settlement Date.

(v) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the [applicable] Settlement Date, you failed to meet, in any
respect, any obligation under any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement
entered into in connection with your Employment or this Award, including the
Firm's notice period requirement applicable to you, any offer letter,
employment agreement or any shareholders' agreement relating to the Firm. Your
failure to pay or reimburse the Firm, on demand, for any amount you owe to the
Firm will constitute (A) failure to meet an obligation you have under an
agreement, regardless of whether such obligation arises under a written
agreement, and/or (B) a material violation of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(vi) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(vii) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You
attempt to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in
any manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 17 or Section 3.17 of the
Plan, or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
14(f)(viii).

(viii) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(ix) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of your Outstanding PSUs.

(x) [GS Inc. Fails to Maintain the Minimum Tier 1 Capital Ratio. Before the
[applicable] Settlement Date, GS Inc. fails to maintain the required "Minimum
Tier 1 Capital Ratio" as defined under Federal Reserve Board Regulations
applicable to GS Inc. for a period of 90 consecutive business days.]

(xi) [GS Inc. Is Determined to Be in Default. Before the [applicable]
Settlement Date, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the FDIC
makes a written recommendation under

Title II (Orderly Liquidation Authority) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act for the appointment of the FDIC as a receiver of
GS Inc. based on a determination that GS Inc. is "in default" or "in danger of
default."]

(xii) [ Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. GS Inc. is
required to prepare an accounting restatement due to GS Inc.'s material
noncompliance, as a result of misconduct, with any financial reporting
requirement under the securities laws as described in Section 304(a) of
Sarbanes-Oxley; provided , however , that your rights with respect to the
PSUs will only be terminated to the same extent that would be required under
Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief executive officer" or
"chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of whether you actually hold
such position at the relevant time).]

(c) Shares at Risk Forfeited upon Certain Events. To the extent you receive
delivery of Shares at Risk in connection with any Settlement Amount, if any of
the following occurs your rights to all of your Shares at Risk will terminate
and your Shares at Risk will be cancelled, in each case, as may be further
described below:

(i) You Failed to Consider Risk. You Failed to Consider Risk during

(ii) Your Conduct Constitutes Cause. Any event that constitutes Cause has
occurred before the [applicable] Transferability Date.

(iii) You Do Not Meet Your Obligations to the Firm. The Committee determines
that, before the [applicable] Transferability Date, you failed to meet, in any
respect, any obligation under any agreement with the Firm, or any agreement
entered into in connection with your Employment or this Award, including the
Firm's notice period requirement applicable to you, any offer letter,
employment agreement or any shareholders' agreement relating to the Firm. Your
failure to pay or reimburse the Firm, on demand, for any amount you owe to the
Firm will constitute (A) failure to meet an obligation you have under an
agreement, regardless of whether such obligation arises under a written
agreement and/or (B) a material violation of Firm policy constituting Cause.

(iv) You Do Not Provide Timely Certifications or Comply with Your
Certifications. You fail to certify to GS Inc. that you have complied with
all of the terms of the Plan and this Award Agreement, or the Committee
determines that you have failed to comply with a term of the Plan or this
Award Agreement to which you have certified compliance.

(v) You Do Not Follow Dispute Resolution/Arbitration Procedures. You attempt
to have any dispute under the Plan or this Award Agreement resolved in any
manner that is not provided for by Paragraph 17 or Section 3.17 of the Plan,
or you attempt to arbitrate a dispute without first having exhausted your
internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph 14(f)(viii).

(vi) You Bring an Action that Results in a Determination that Any Award
Agreement Term Is Invalid. As a result of any action brought by you, it is
determined that any term of this Award Agreement is invalid.

(vii) You Receive Compensation in Respect of Your Award from Another
Employer. Your Employment terminates for any reason or you otherwise are no
longer actively Employed with the Firm and another entity grants you cash,
equity or other property (whether vested or unvested) to replace, substitute
for or otherwise in respect of any Shares at Risk; provided , however ,
that your rights will only be terminated in respect of the Shares at Risk that
are replaced, substituted for or otherwise considered by such other entity in
making its grant.

(viii) [ Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. GS Inc. is
required to prepare an accounting restatement due to GS Inc.'s material
noncompliance, as a result of misconduct, with any financial reporting
requirement under the securities laws as described in Section 304(a) of
Sarbanes-Oxley; provided , however , that your rights will only be
terminated in respect of Shares at Risk to the same extent that would be
required under Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief
executive officer" or "chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of
whether you actually hold such position at the relevant time).]

R EPAYMENT OF YOUR AWARD 

10. When You May Be Required to Repay Your Award .

(a) Repayment, Generally. If the Committee determines that any term of this
Award was not satisfied, you will be required, immediately upon demand
therefor, to repay to the Firm the following:

(i) Any Settlement Amount (including any Shares at Risk) for which the terms
(including the terms for delivery) of the related PSUs were not satisfied, in
accordance with Section 2.6.3 of the Plan.

(ii) Any Shares at Risk for which the terms (including the terms for the
release of Transfer Restrictions) were not satisfied, in accordance with
Section 2.5.3 of the Plan.

(iii) Any Shares that were delivered (but not subject to Transfer
Restrictions) at the same time any Shares at Risk that are cancelled or
required to be repaid were delivered.

(iv) [Any Dividend Equivalent Payments for which the terms were not satisfied
(including any such payments made in respect of PSUs that are forfeited or any
Settlement Amount that is required to be repaid), in accordance with Section
2.8.3 of the Plan.]

(v) Any dividends paid in respect of any delivered Shares (including Shares at
Risk) that are cancelled or required to be repaid.

(vi) Any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations with
respect to any PSUs, Settlement Amount [(including Shares at Risk)], [or]
dividend payments [or Dividend Equivalent Payments] that are forfeited or
required to be repaid.

(b) Repayment Upon Materially Inaccurate Financial Statements. If any
delivery is made under this Award Agreement based on materially inaccurate
financial statements (which includes, but is not limited to, statements of
earnings, revenues or gains) or other materially inaccurate performance
criteria, you will be obligated to repay to the Firm, immediately upon demand
therefor, any excess amount delivered, as determined by the Committee in its
sole discretion.

(c) [Repayment Upon Accounting Restatement Required Under Sarbanes-Oxley. If
an event described in Paragraphs 9(b)(xii) and 9(c)(viii) (relating to a
requirement under Sarbanes-Oxley that GS Inc. prepare an accounting
restatement) occurs, any Settlement Amount (including Shares at Risk),
dividend payments, [Dividend Equivalent Payments,] cash or other property
delivered, paid or withheld in respect of this Award will be subject to
repayment as described in Paragraph 10(a) to the same extent that would be
required under Section 304(a) of Sarbanes-Oxley had you been a "chief
executive officer" or "chief financial officer" of GS Inc. (regardless of
whether you actually hold such position at the relevant time).]

T ERMINATIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 

11. Termination of Employment Generally . Unless the Committee
determines otherwise, if your Employment terminates for any reason or you are
otherwise no longer actively Employed with the Firm (which includes off-
premises notice periods, "garden leaves," pay in lieu of notice or any other
similar status), the Performance Goal[s] applicable to your Outstanding PSUs
will continue to apply with respect to your Vested PSUs [( e.g., PSUs that
become Vested in connection with Extended Absence, Qualified Termination,
Change in Control or death as described in Paragraphs 12 and 13)] and the
determination of the Settlement Amount will continue to be subject to whether
or not, and to what extent, the Performance Goal[s] [has][have] been achieved
with respect to your Vested PSUs, in each case, as provided in Paragraph 6.
All other terms of this Award Agreement, including the forfeiture and
repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply.

12. [Circumstances Under Which You Will Not Forfeit Your Unvested PSUs on
Employment Termination (but the Performance Goal, Original Settlement Date and
Transferability Date Continue to Apply) . If your Employment terminates
at a time when you meet the requirements for Extended Absence or Retirement,
each as described below, then Paragraph 9(a) will not apply, and your
Outstanding PSUs will be treated as described in this Paragraph 12. The
Performance Goal applicable to your Outstanding PSUs will continue to apply
and the determination of the Settlement Amount will continue to be subject to
whether or not, and to what extent, the Performance Goal has been achieved, in
each case, as provided in Paragraph 6. All other terms of this Award
Agreement, including the other forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9
and 10, continue to apply.

(a) Extended Absence or Retirement. If your Employment terminates by
Extended Absence or Retirement, your Outstanding PSUs that are not Vested will
become Vested. For the avoidance of doubt, your rights to any Outstanding PSUs
will be terminated and no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect
thereof if you Associate With a Covered Enterprise during the Performance
Period, as described in Paragraph 9(b)(i).]

12. [Extended Absence or Qualified Termination . If your Employment
terminates at a time when you meet the requirements for Extended Absence or a
Qualified Termination, then Paragraph 9(a) will not apply to the extent
described in this Paragraph 12, and your Outstanding PSUs will be treated as
described in this Paragraph 12. All other terms of this Award Agreement,
including the other forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9 and 10,
continue to apply. In each case, the Performance Goals applicable to your
Outstanding PSUs will continue to apply, and the determination of the
Settlement Amount will continue to be subject to whether or not, and to what
extent, the Performance Goals have been achieved, as provided in Paragraph 6.

(a) Extended Absence. If your Employment terminates by Extended Absence,
your Outstanding PSUs that are not Vested will become Vested. For the
avoidance of doubt, your rights to any Outstanding PSUs will be terminated and
no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect thereof if you Associate
With a Covered Enterprise during the Performance Period, as described in
Paragraph 9(b)(i).

(b) Qualified Termination. If the Firm terminates your Employment solely by
reason of a Qualified Termination and you execute a general waiver and release
of claims and an agreement to pay any associated tax liability in the form the
Firm prescribes, a pro rata portion of your Outstanding PSUs (based on the
portion of the Performance Period during which you were Employed) will become
Vested. For the avoidance of doubt, your rights to any Outstanding PSUs will
be terminated and no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect thereof if
you Associate With a Covered Enterprise during the Performance Period, as
described in Paragraph 9(b)(i).]

13. [Accelerated Vesting and/or Release of Transfer Restrictions in the
Event of a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control or Death .
In the event of your Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control or
death, each as described below, Paragraph 9(a) will not apply, your
Outstanding PSUs or, to the extent you have received delivery in connection
with any Settlement Amount, your Shares at Risk, will be treated as described
in this Paragraph 13, and, except as set forth in Paragraph 13(a), all other
terms of this Award Agreement, including the other forfeiture and repayment
events in Paragraphs 9 and 10, continue to apply. In each case, the
Performance Goal applicable to your Outstanding PSUs will continue to apply
and the determination of the Settlement Amount will continue to be subject to
whether or not, and to what extent, the Performance Goal has been achieved, in
each case, as provided in Paragraph 6.

(a) You Have a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control. If your
Employment terminates when you meet the requirements of a Qualifying
Termination After a Change in Control, you will, on the Settlement Date,
receive delivery of the Settlement Amount and payment of the Dividend
Equivalent Payments that, in each case, would have otherwise been made
pursuant to Paragraph 6, and any Transfer Restrictions will cease to apply to
your Shares at Risk. In addition, the forfeiture events in Paragraph 9 will
not apply to your Shares at Risk.

(b) Death. If you die, after such documentation as may be requested by the
Committee is provided to the Committee, (i) the representative of your estate
will receive delivery of the Settlement Amount and payment of the Dividend
Equivalent Payments on the Settlement Date that, in each case, would have
otherwise been made pursuant to Paragraph 6, and (ii) any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply to your Shares at Risk as soon as practicable
after the date of death.

13. [Change in Control or Death . In the event of a Change in
Control or death, each as described below, your Outstanding PSUs will be
treated as described in this Paragraph 13. All other terms of this Award
Agreement, including the other forfeiture and repayment events in Paragraphs 9
and 10, continue to apply. In each case, the Performance Goals applicable to
your Outstanding PSUs will continue to apply, and the determination of the
Settlement Amount will continue to be subject to whether or not, and to what
extent, the Performance Goals have been achieved, as provided in Paragraph 6.

(a) Change in Control.

(i) In the event of a Change in Control which would result in none of GS Inc.,
its successors (including any surviving or acquiring entity or its affiliates)
or affiliates being listed or publicly traded on any national securities
exchange ("Delisting Change in Control"): (A) Paragraph 9(a) will not apply
and your PSUs that are not Vested will become Vested, (B) the last day of the
Performance

Period will be deemed to be the effective date of the Change in Control, (C)
the Determination Date will be as soon as practicable after the effective date
of the Change in Control and (D) the Settlement Date[s] will occur as soon as
practicable following the Determination Date, but no later than March 15
coinciding with the last day of the applicable "short-term deferral" period
described in Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4). Any Transfer Restrictions will cease to
apply to your Shares at Risk, and the forfeiture events in Paragraph 9 will
not apply to your Shares at Risk.

(ii) If the Change in Control is not a Delisting Change in Control described
in Paragraph 13(a)(i) and if your Employment terminates when you meet the
requirements of a Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control, then (i)
Paragraph 9(a) will not apply and your PSUs that are not Vested will become
Vested, and (ii) you will receive delivery of the Settlement Amount [and
payment of the Dividend Equivalent Payments] on the [applicable] Settlement
Date that would have otherwise been made pursuant to Paragraph 6. Any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply to your Shares at Risk, and the forfeiture
events in Paragraph 9 will not apply to your Shares at Risk.

(b) Death. If you die, after such documentation as may be requested by the
Committee is provided to the Committee, (i) Paragraph 9(a) will not apply and
your PSUs that are not Vested will become Vested, (ii) the representative of
your estate will receive delivery of the Settlement Amount [and payment of the
Dividend Equivalent Payments] on the [applicable] Settlement Date that would
have otherwise been made pursuant to Paragraph 6, and (iii) any Transfer
Restrictions will cease to apply to your Shares at Risk as soon as practicable
after the date of death.]

O THER TERMS, CONDITIONS AND AGREEMENTS 

14. Additional Terms, Conditions and Agreements .

(a) You Must Satisfy Applicable Tax Withholding Requirements. Delivery of
the Settlement Amount is conditioned on your satisfaction of any applicable
withholding taxes in accordance with Section 3.2 of the Plan, which includes
the Firm deducting or withholding amounts from any payment or distribution to
you. In addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its
sole discretion, may require you to provide amounts equal to all or a portion
of any Federal, state, local, foreign or other tax obligations imposed on you
or the Firm in connection with the grant, Vesting or delivery of this Award by
requiring you to choose between remitting the amount (i) in cash (or through
payroll deduction or otherwise) or (ii) in the form of proceeds from the
Firm's executing a sale of Shares delivered to you pursuant to this Award. In
no event, however, does this Paragraph 14(a) give you any discretion to
determine or affect the timing of delivery of the Settlement Amount or the
timing of payment of tax obligations.

(b) Firm May Deliver Cash or Other Property in Respect of the Settlement
Amount. In accordance with Section 1.3.2(i) of the Plan, in the sole
discretion of the Committee, in lieu of all or any portion of the Settlement
Amount, the Firm may deliver cash, other securities, other awards under the
Plan or other property, and all references in this Award Agreement to delivery
of the Settlement Amount will include such deliveries of cash, other
securities, other awards under the Plan or other property.

(c) Amounts May Be Rounded to Avoid Fractional Shares. PSUs that become
Vested on a Vesting Date and any amounts delivered in respect of the
Settlement Amount[, including Shares at Risk,] may be rounded to avoid
fractional Shares.

(d) You May Be Required to Become a Party to the Shareholders' Agreement.
Your rights to your PSUs are conditioned on your becoming a party to any
shareholders' agreement to which other

similarly situated employees ( e.g., employees with a similar title or
position) of the Firm are required to be a party.

(e) Firm May Affix Legends and Place Stop Orders on Shares. GS Inc. may
affix to Certificates representing Shares any legend that the Committee
determines to be necessary or advisable (including to reflect any restrictions
to which you may be subject under a separate agreement). GS Inc. may advise
the transfer agent to place a stop order against any legended Shares.

(f) You Agree to Certain Consents, Terms and Conditions. By accepting this
Award you understand and agree that:

(i) You Agree to Certain Consents as a Condition to the Award. You have
expressly consented to all of the items listed in Section 3.3.3(d) of the
Plan, including the Firm's supplying to any third-party recordkeeper of the
Plan or other person such personal information of yours as the Committee deems
advisable to administer the Plan, and you agree to provide any additional
consents that the Committee determines to be necessary or advisable;

(ii) You Are Subject to the Firm's Policies, Rules and Procedures. You are
subject to the Firm's policies in effect from time to time concerning trading
in Shares and hedging or pledging Shares and equity-based compensation or
other awards (including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with Respect
to Personal Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards" or any
successor policies), and confidential or proprietary information, and you will
effect sales of Shares in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be
adopted from time to time (which may include, without limitation, restrictions
relating to the timing of sale requests, the manner in which sales are
executed, pricing method, consolidation or aggregation of orders and volume
limits determined by the Firm);

(iii) You Are Responsible for Costs Associated with Your Award. You will be
responsible for all brokerage costs and other fees or expenses associated with
your Award, including those related to the sale of Shares;

(iv) You Will Be Deemed to Represent Your Compliance with All the Terms of
Your Award if You Accept Delivery. You will be deemed to have represented and
certified that you have complied with all of the terms of the Plan and this
Award Agreement when any Settlement Amount [and Dividend Equivalent Payments
are] [is] delivered to you, and you request the sale of Shares following the
release of Transfer Restrictions on Shares at Risk;

(v) Firm May Deliver Your Award into an Escrow Account. The Firm may
establish and maintain an escrow account on such terms (which may include your
executing any documents related to, and your paying for any costs associated
with, such account) as it may deem necessary or appropriate, and the
Settlement Amount may initially be delivered[, and any Dividend Equivalent
Payments and dividends may initially be paid,] into and held in that escrow
account until such time as the Committee has received such documentation as it
may have requested or until the Committee has determined that any other
conditions or restrictions on deliveries required by this Award Agreement have
been satisfied;

(vi) You May Be Required to Certify Compliance with Award Terms; You Are
Responsible for Providing the Firm with Updated Address and Contact
Information After Your Departure from the Firm. If your Employment terminates
while you continue to hold PSUs or Shares at Risk, from time to time, you may
be required to provide certifications of your compliance with all of the terms
of the Plan and this Award Agreement as described in Paragraphs 9(b)(vi) and
9(c)(iv). You understand and agree that (A) your address on file with the Firm
at the time any certification is required will be deemed to

be your current address, (B) it is your responsibility to inform the Firm of
any changes to your address to ensure timely receipt of the certification
materials, (C) you are responsible for contacting the Firm to obtain such
certification materials if not received and (D) your failure to return
properly completed certification materials by the specified deadline (which
includes your failure to timely return the completed certification because you
did not provide the Firm with updated contact information) will result in the
forfeiture of all of your PSUs or Shares at Risk and subject previously
delivered amounts to repayment under Paragraphs 9(b)(vi) and 9(c)(iv);

(vii) You Authorize the Firm to Register, in Its or Its Designee's Name, Any
Shares at Risk and Sell, Assign or Transfer Any Forfeited Shares at Risk. You
are granting to the Firm the full power and authority to register any Shares
at Risk in its or its designee's name and authorizing the Firm or its designee
to sell, assign or transfer any Shares at Risk if you forfeit your Shares at
Risk;

(viii) You Must Comply with Applicable Deadlines and Procedures to Appeal
Determinations Made by the Committee. If you disagree with a determination
made by the Committee, the SIP Committee, the SIP Administrators, or any of
their delegates or designees and you wish to appeal such determination, you
must submit a written request to the SIP Committee for review within 180 days
after the determination at issue. You must exhaust your internal
administrative remedies ( i.e. , submit your appeal and wait for resolution
of that appeal) before seeking to resolve a dispute through arbitration
pursuant to Paragraph 17 and Section 3.17 of the Plan; and

(ix) You Agree that Covered Persons Will Not Have Liability. In addition to
and without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 1.3.5 of the
Plan, neither the Firm nor any Covered Person will have any liability to you
or any other person for any action taken or omitted in respect of this or any
other Award.

15. Non-transferability . Except as otherwise may be provided in
this Paragraph 15 or as otherwise may be provided by the Committee, the
limitations on transferability set forth in Section 3.5 of the Plan will apply
to this Award. Any purported transfer or assignment in violation of the
provisions of this Paragraph 15 or Section 3.5 of the Plan will be void. The
Committee may adopt procedures pursuant to which some or all recipients of
PSUs and Shares at Risk may transfer some or all of their PSUs or Shares at
Risk (which will continue to be subject to Transfer Restrictions until the
[applicable] Transferability Date) through a gift for no consideration to any
immediate family member, a trust or other estate planning vehicle approved by
the Committee or SIP Committee in which the recipient and/or the recipient's
immediate family members in the aggregate have 100% of the beneficial
interest.

16. Right of Offset . Except as provided in Paragraph 19(d), the
obligation to deliver the Settlement Amount, pay dividends [or Dividend
Equivalent Payments] or release Transfer Restrictions under this Award
Agreement is subject to Section 3.4 of the Plan, which provides for the Firm's
right to offset against such obligation any outstanding amounts you owe to the
Firm and any amounts the Committee deems appropriate pursuant to any tax
equalization policy or agreement.

A RBITRATION, CHOICE OF FORUM AND GOVERNING LAW 

17. Arbitration; Choice of Forum .

(a) B Y ACCEPTING THIS AWARD, YOU ARE INDICATING THAT YOU UNDERSTAND AND
AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF FORUM PROVISIONS SET FORTH IN
SECTION   3.17 OF THE PLAN WILL APPLY TO THIS AWARD. THESE
PROVISIONS, WHICH ARE EXPRESSLY INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE, PROVIDE
AMONG OTHER THINGS THAT ANY DISPUTE, CONTROVERSY OR CLAIM BETWEEN THE FIRM AND
YOU ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO OR 

CONCERNING THE PLAN OR THIS AWARD AGREEMENT WILL BE FINALLY SETTLED BY
ARBITRATION IN NEW YORK CITY, PURSUANT TO THE TERMS MORE FULLY SET FORTH IN
SECTION 3.17 OF THE PLAN; PROVIDED THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE YOU FROM
FILING A CHARGE WITH OR PARTICIPATING IN ANY INVESTIGATION OR PROCEEDING
CONDUCTED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE SEC,
THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND A STATE OR LOCAL HUMAN RIGHTS
AGENCY, AS WELL AS LAW ENFORCEMENT. 

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider class, collective or representative claims, to order
consolidation or to join different claimants or grant relief other than on an
individual basis to the individual claimant involved.

(c) Notwithstanding any applicable forum rules to the contrary, to the extent
there is a question of enforceability of this Award Agreement arising from a
challenge to the arbitrator's jurisdiction or to the arbitrability of a claim,
it will be decided by a court and not an arbitrator.

(d) The Federal Arbitration Act governs interpretation and enforcement of all
arbitration provisions under the Plan and this Award Agreement, and all
arbitration proceedings thereunder.

(e) Nothing in this Award Agreement creates a substantive right to bring a
claim under U.S. Federal, state, or local employment laws.

(f) By accepting your Award, you irrevocably appoint each General Counsel of
GS Inc., or any person whom the General Counsel of GS Inc. designates, as your
agent for service of process in connection with any suit, action or proceeding
arising out of or relating to or concerning the Plan or any Award which is not
arbitrated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.17.1 of the Plan, who shall
promptly advise you of any such service of process.

(g) To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no arbitrator will have
the authority to consider any claim as to which you have not first exhausted
your internal administrative remedies in accordance with Paragraph
14(f)(viii).

18. Governing Law . T HIS AWARD WILL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICT OF LAWS.

C ERTAIN TAX PROVISIONS 

19. Compliance of Award Agreement and Plan with Section 

409A . The provisions of this Paragraph 19 apply to you only if you
are a U.S. taxpayer.

(a) This Award Agreement and the Plan provisions that apply to this Award are
intended and will be construed to comply with Section 409A (including the
requirements applicable to, or the conditions for exemption from treatment as,
409A Deferred Compensation), whether by reason of short-term deferral
treatment or other exceptions or provisions. The Committee will have full
authority to give effect to this intent. To the extent necessary to give
effect to this intent, in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency
between the provisions of the Plan (including Sections 1.3.2 and 2.1 thereof)
and this Award Agreement, the provisions of this Award Agreement will govern,
and in the case of any conflict or potential inconsistency between this
Paragraph 19 and the other provisions of this Award Agreement, this Paragraph
19 will govern.

(b) Settlement will not be delayed beyond the date on which all applicable
conditions or restrictions on settlement in respect of your PSUs required by
this Award Agreement (including [those specified in Paragraph 12(b) (execution
of waiver and release of claims agreement to pay associated tax liability)
and] the consents and other items specified in Section 3.3 of the Plan) are
satisfied. To the extent that any portion of this Award is intended to satisfy
the requirements for short-term deferral treatment under Section 409A,
settlement in respect of such portion will occur by the March 15 coinciding
with the last day of the applicable "short-term deferral" period described in
Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4) in order for settlement to be within the short-term
deferral exception unless, in order to permit all applicable conditions or
restrictions on settlement to be satisfied, the Committee elects, pursuant to
Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may be permitted in accordance
with Section 409A, to delay settlement to a later date within the same
calendar year or to such later date as may be permitted under Section 409A,
including Reg. § 1.409A-3(d). For the avoidance of doubt, if the Award
includes a "series of installment payments" as described in Reg. §
1.409A-2(b)(2)(iii), your right to the series of installment payments will be
treated as a right to a series of separate payments and not as a right to a
single payment.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 14(b) and Section 1.3.2(i) of
the Plan, to the extent necessary to comply with Section 409A, any delivery or
payment (including in the form of Shares at Risk or other property) that the
Firm may make in respect of your PSUs will not have the effect of deferring
payment, delivery, income inclusion, or a substantial risk of forfeiture,
beyond the date on which such payment, delivery or inclusion would occur or
such risk of forfeiture would lapse, with respect to the payment or delivery
that would otherwise have been made (unless the Committee elects a later date
for this purpose pursuant to Reg. § 1.409A-1(b)(4)(i)(D) or otherwise as may
be permitted under Section 409A, including and to the extent applicable, the
subsequent election provisions of Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and Reg. §
1.409A-2(b)).

(d) Paragraph 16 and Section 3.4 of the Plan will not apply to Awards that are
409A Deferred Compensation except to the extent permitted under Section 409A.

(e) Settlement in respect of any portion of the Award may be made, if and to
the extent elected by the Committee, later than the relevant Settlement Date
or other date or period specified hereinabove (but, in the case of any Award
that constitutes 409A Deferred Compensation, only to the extent that the later
payment or delivery, as applicable, is permitted under Section 409A).

(f) You understand and agree that you are solely responsible for the payment
of any taxes and penalties due pursuant to Section 409A, but in no event will
you be permitted to designate, directly or indirectly, the taxable year of the
delivery.

C OMMITTEE AUTHORITY, AMENDMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY REPORTING 

20. Committee Authority . The Committee has the authority to
determine, in its sole discretion, that any event triggering forfeiture or
repayment of your Award will not apply, to limit the forfeitures and
repayments that result under Paragraphs 9 and 10 and to remove Transfer
Restrictions before the [applicable] Transferability Date. [In addition, the
Committee, in its sole discretion, may determine whether Paragraph 12(b) will
apply upon a termination of Employment.]

21. Amendment . The Committee reserves the right at any time to
amend the terms of this Award Agreement, and the Board may amend the Plan in
any respect; provided that , notwithstanding the foregoing and Sections
1.3.2(f), 1.3.2(h) and 3.1 of the Plan, no such amendment will materially
adversely affect your rights and obligations under this Award Agreement
without your consent; and provided further that the Committee expressly
reserves its rights to amend the Award Agreement and the Plan as described in
Sections 1.3.2(h)(1), (2) and (4) of the Plan. A modification that impacts the
tax

consequences of this Award or the timing of delivery will not be an amendment
that materially adversely affects your rights and obligations under this Award
Agreement. Any amendment of this Award Agreement will be in writing.

22. Construction, Headings . Unless the context requires otherwise,
(a) words describing the singular number include the plural and vice versa,
(b) words denoting any gender include all genders and (c) the words "include,"
"includes" and "including" will be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation." The headings in this Award Agreement are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not intended to define or limit the construction of
the provisions hereof. References in this Award Agreement to any specific Plan
provision will not be construed as limiting the applicability of any other
Plan provision.

23. Providing Information to the Appropriate Authorities . In
accordance with applicable law, nothing in this Award Agreement (including the
forfeiture and repayment provisions in Paragraphs 9 and 10) or the Plan
prevents you from providing information you reasonably believe to be true to
the appropriate governmental authority, including a regulatory, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental entity; reporting possible violations of
law or regulation; making other disclosures that are protected under any
applicable law or regulation; or filing a charge or participating in any
investigation or proceeding conducted by a governmental authority. For the
avoidance of doubt, governmental authority includes federal, state and local
government agencies such as the SEC, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission and any state or local human rights agency ( e.g. , the New York
State Division of Human Rights, the New York City Commission on Human Rights,
the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing), as well as law
enforcement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , GS Inc. has caused this Award Agreement to be duly
executed and delivered as of the Date of Grant.

THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC.

[U.K. M ATERIAL RISK TAKER APPENDIX 

This Appendix supplements Paragraph 9 and sets forth additional events that
result in forfeiture of up to all of your PSUs and Shares at Risk and may
require repayment to the Firm of up to all other amounts previously delivered
or paid to you under your Award in accordance with Paragraph 10. As with the
events described in Paragraph 9, more than one event may apply, in no case
will the occurrence of one event limit the forfeiture and repayment
obligations as a result of the occurrence of any other event and the Firm
reserves the right to (a) suspend vesting of Outstanding PSUs, delivery of the
Settlement Amount or release of Transfer Restrictions, (b) deliver the
Settlement Amount or dividends into an escrow account in accordance with
Paragraph 14(f)(v) or (c) apply Transfer Restrictions to any Shares in
connection with any investigation of whether any of the events that result in
forfeiture under this Appendix have occurred.

With respect to the events described in this Appendix, the Committee will
consider certain factors to determine whether and what portion of your Award
will terminate, including the reason for the "Loss Event" (as defined below)
or "Risk Event" (as defined below) and the extent to which: (1) you
participated in the Loss Event or Risk Event, (2) your compensation for
 may or may not have been adjusted to take into account the risk
associated with the Loss Event, Risk Event, your "Serious Misconduct" (as
defined below) or the Serious Misconduct of a "Supervised Employee" (as
defined below) and (3) your compensation may be adjusted for the year in which
the Loss Event, Risk Event, your Serious Misconduct or a Supervised Employee's
Serious Misconduct is discovered.

(a) A Loss Event Occurs Prior to Delivery. If a Loss Event occurs prior to
the delivery of the Settlement Amount, your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your PSUs (whether or not Vested) which are scheduled to deliver on
the next Settlement Date immediately following the date that the Loss Event is
identified (or, if not practicable, then the next following Settlement Date)
will terminate, and no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect of such
PSUs.

(i) A " Loss Event " means (A) an annual pre-tax loss at GS Inc. or (B)
annual negative revenues in one or more reporting segments as disclosed in the
Firm's Form 10-K other than the Asset Management segment, or annual negative
revenues in the Asset Management segment of $5 billion or more, provided in
either case that you are employed in a business within such reporting segment.

(b) A Risk Event Occurs . If a Risk Event occurs , (i)
your rights in respect of all or a portion of your PSUs (whether or not
Vested) will terminate and no Settlement Amount will be delivered in respect
of such PSUs, (ii) your rights to all or a portion of any Shares at Risk will
terminate and such Shares at Risk will be cancelled and (iii) you will be
obligated immediately upon demand therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in
excess of the greater of the Fair Market Value of the Settlement Amount (plus
any dividend payments) delivered in respect of the Award (without reduction
for any amount applied to satisfy tax withholding or other obligations)
determined as of (A) the date the Risk Event occurred and (B) the date that
the repayment request is made.

(i) A " Risk Event " means there occurs a loss of 5% or more of firmwide
total capital from a reportable operational risk event determined in
accordance with the firmwide Reporting Operational Risk Events Policy.

(c) You Engage in Serious Misconduct . If you engage in Serious
Misconduct , you will be obligated immediately upon demand
therefor to pay the Firm an amount not in excess of the greater of the Fair
Market Value of the Settlement Amount (plus any dividend payments) delivered
in respect of the Award (without reduction for any amount applied to satisfy
tax withholding or other obligations) determined as of (i) the date the
Serious Misconduct occurred and (ii) the date that the repayment request is
made.

(i) " Serious Misconduct " means that you engage in conduct that the Firm
reasonably considers, in its sole discretion, to be misconduct sufficient to
justify summary termination of employment under English law.

(d) A Supervised Employee Engages in Serious Misconduct. If the Committee
determines that it is appropriate to hold you accountable in whole or in part
for Serious Misconduct related to compliance, control or risk that occurred
during  by a Supervised Employee, your rights in respect of all or a
portion of your PSUs (whether or not Vested) will terminate and no Settlement
Amount will be delivered in respect of such PSUs and your rights to all or a
portion of any Shares at Risk will terminate and such Shares at Risk will be
cancelled.

(i) " Supervised Employee " means an individual with respect to whom the
Committee determines you had supervisory responsibility as a result of direct
or indirect reporting lines or your management responsibility for an office,
division or business.

Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan, this Award Agreement or any other
agreement or arrangement you may have with the Firm, the parties agree that to
the extent that there is any dispute arising out of or relating to the payment
required by Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this Appendix (including your refusal to
remit payment) the parties will submit to arbitration in accordance with
Paragraph 17 of this Award Agreement and Section 3.17 of the Plan as the sole
means of resolution of such dispute (including the recovery by the Firm of the
payment amount).]

D EFINITIONS APPENDIX 

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
following meanings:

(a) " 409A Deferred Compensation " means a "deferral of compensation" or
"deferred compensation" as those terms are defined in the regulations under
Section 409A.

(b) " Associate With a Covered Enterprise " means that you (i) form, or
acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit participation
interest in, any Covered Enterprise or (ii) associate in any capacity
(including association as an officer, employee, partner, director, consultant,
agent or advisor) with any Covered Enterprise. Associate With a Covered
Enterprise may include, as determined in the discretion of the Committee, (i)
becoming the subject of any publicly available announcement or report of a
pending or future association with a Covered Enterprise and (ii) unpaid
associations, including an association in contemplation of future employment.
"Association With a Covered Enterprise" will have its correlative meaning.

(c) " Covered Enterprise " means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or that the Firm
reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages in,
holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in any
other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage
("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities include any
activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or in which the Firm reasonably expects to engage,
irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in furtherance of an
advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
any product or service, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in any activity, in any case, associated
with investment banking; public or private finance; lending; financial
advisory services; private investing for anyone other than you or your family
members (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any type of proprietary
investing or trading); private wealth management; private banking; consumer or
commercial cash management; consumer, digital or commercial banking; merchant
banking; asset, portfolio or hedge fund management; insurance or reinsurance
underwriting or brokerage; property management; or securities, futures,
commodities, energy, derivatives, currency or digital asset brokerage, sales,
lending, custody, clearance, settlement or trading. An enterprise that offers,
holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities is a Covered
Enterprise , irrespective of whether the enterprise is a customer, client or
counterparty of the Firm or is otherwise associated with the Firm and, because
the Firm is a global enterprise, irrespective of where the Covered Enterprise
is physically located.

(d) " Determination Date " means the date specified on your Award Statement
as the date on which the Committee will determine whether or not, and to what
extent, the Performance Goal[s] [was][were] achieved for the Performance
Period.

(e) " Dividend Equivalent Payments " means any payments made in respect of
Dividend Equivalent Rights.

(f) " FDIC " means the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any
successor thereto.

(g) " Failed to Consider Risk " means that you participated (or otherwise
oversaw or were responsible for, depending on the circumstances, another
individual's participation) in the structuring or marketing of any product or
service, or participated on behalf of the Firm or any of its clients in the
purchase or sale of any security or other property, in any case without
appropriate consideration of the risk to the Firm or the broader financial
system as a whole (for example, where you have improperly analyzed such risk
or where you have failed sufficiently to raise concerns about such risk) and,
as a result of such action or omission, the Committee determines there has
been, or reasonably could be expected to be, a material adverse impact on the
Firm, your business unit or the broader financial system.

(h) " Performance Goal " means the performance goal determined by the
Committee that is specified on your Award Statement.

(i) " Performance Period " means the performance period determined by the
Committee that is specified on your Award Statement.

(j) [" Qualified Termination " means the termination of your Employment by
the Firm where none of the forfeiture and repayment events described in
Paragraphs 9 and 10 has occurred. No Employment termination that you initiate,
including any purported "constructive termination," a "termination for good
reason" or similar concepts, can be a Qualified Termination.]

(k) " Qualifying Termination After a Change in Control " means that the Firm
terminates your Employment other than for Cause or you terminate your
Employment for Good Reason, in each case, within 18 months following a Change
in Control.

(l) [" Sarbanes-Oxley " means the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended.]

(m) " SEC " means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

(n) " Selected Firm Personnel " means any individual who is or in the three
months preceding the conduct prohibited by Paragraph 9(b)(ii) was (i) a Firm
employee or consultant with whom you personally worked while employed by the
Firm, (ii) a Firm employee or consultant who, at any time during the year
preceding the date of the termination of your Employment, worked in the same
division in which you worked or (iii) an Advisory Director, a Managing
Director or a Senior Advisor of the Firm.

(o) " Settlement Amount " means an amount deliverable to you in respect of
your PSUs (determined as described in the Award Statement).

(p) " Settlement Date " means each date specified on your Award Statement as
the date on which the Settlement Amount will be delivered, provided , unless
the Committee determines otherwise, such date is during a Window Period or, if
such date is not during a Window Period, the first trading day of the first
Window Period beginning after such date.

(q) " Share " means a share of Common Stock.

(r) " Shares at Risk " means Shares that are subject to Transfer
Restrictions.

The following capitalized terms are used in this Award Agreement with the
meanings that are assigned to them in the Plan:

(a) " Account " means any brokerage account, custody account or similar
account, as approved or required by GS Inc. from time to time, into which
shares of Common Stock, cash or other property in respect of an Award are
delivered.

(b) " Award Agreement " means the written document or documents by which
each Award is evidenced, including any related Award Statement and signature
card.

(c) " Award Statement " means a written statement that reflects certain
Award terms.

(d) " Board " means the Board of Directors of GS Inc.

(e) " Business Day " means any day other than a Saturday, a Sunday or a day
on which banking institutions in New York City are authorized or obligated by
Federal law or executive order to be closed.

(f) " Cause " means (i) the Grantee's conviction, whether following trial or
by plea of guilty or nolo contendere (or similar plea), in a criminal
proceeding (A) on a misdemeanor charge involving fraud, false statements or
misleading omissions, wrongful taking, embezzlement, bribery, forgery,
counterfeiting or extortion, or (B) on a felony charge, or (C) on an
equivalent charge to those in clauses (A) and (B) in jurisdictions which do
not use those designations, (ii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct which
constitutes an employment disqualification under applicable law (including
statutory disqualification as defined under the Exchange Act), (iii) the
Grantee's willful failure to perform the Grantee's duties to the Firm, (iv)
the Grantee's violation of any securities or commodities laws, any rules or
regulations issued pursuant to such laws, or the rules and regulations of any
securities or commodities exchange or association of which the Firm is a
member, (v) the Grantee's violation of any Firm policy concerning hedging or
pledging or confidential or proprietary information, or the Grantee's material
violation of any other Firm policy as in effect from time to time, (vi) the
Grantee's engaging in any act or making any statement which impairs, impugns,
denigrates, disparages or negatively reflects upon the name, reputation or
business interests of the Firm or (vii) the Grantee's engaging in any conduct
detrimental to the Firm. The determination as to whether Cause has occurred
shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion and, in such case, the
Committee also may, but shall not be required to, specify the date such Cause
occurred (including by determining that a prior termination of Employment was
for Cause). Any rights the Firm may have hereunder and in any Award Agreement
in respect of the events giving rise to Cause shall be in addition to the
rights the Firm may have under any other agreement with a Grantee or at law or
in equity.

(g) " Certificate " means a stock certificate (or other appropriate document
or evidence of ownership) representing shares of Common Stock.

(h) " Change in Control " means the consummation of a merger, consolidation,
statutory share exchange or similar form of corporate transaction involving GS
Inc. (a "Reorganization") or sale or other disposition of all or substantially
all of GS Inc.'s assets to an entity that is not an affiliate of GS Inc. (a
"Sale"), that in each case requires the approval of GS Inc.'s shareholders
under the law of GS Inc.'s jurisdiction of organization, whether for such
Reorganization or Sale (or the issuance of securities of GS Inc. in such
Reorganization or Sale), unless immediately following such Reorganization or
Sale, either: (i) at least 50% of the total voting power (in respect of the
election of directors, or similar officials in the case of an entity other
than a corporation) of (A) the entity resulting from such Reorganization, or
the entity which has acquired all or substantially all of the assets of GS
Inc. in a Sale (in either case, the "Surviving Entity"), or (B) if applicable,
the ultimate parent entity that directly or indirectly has beneficial

ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as such
Rule is in effect on the date of the adoption of the 1999 SIP) of 50% or more
of the total voting power (in respect of the election of directors, or similar
officials in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the Surviving
Entity (the "Parent Entity") is represented by GS Inc.'s securities (the "GS
Inc. Securities") that were outstanding immediately prior to such
Reorganization or Sale (or, if applicable, is represented by shares into which
such GS Inc. Securities were converted pursuant to such Reorganization or
Sale) or (ii) at least 50% of the members of the board of directors (or
similar officials in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the
Parent Entity (or, if there is no Parent Entity, the Surviving Entity)
following the consummation of the Reorganization or Sale were, at the time of
the Board's approval of the execution of the initial agreement providing for
such Reorganization or Sale, individuals (the "Incumbent Directors") who
either (A) were members of the Board on the Effective Date or (B) became
directors subsequent to the Effective Date and whose election or nomination
for election was approved by a vote of at least two-thirds of the Incumbent
Directors then on the Board (either by a specific vote or by approval of GS
Inc.'s proxy statement in which such persons are named as nominees for
director).

(i) " Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm to whom
the Grantee provided services, or for whom the Grantee transacted business, or
whose identity became known to the Grantee in connection with the Grantee's
relationship with or employment by the Firm.

(j) " Code " means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time
to time, and the applicable rulings and regulations thereunder.

(k) " Committee " means the committee appointed by the Board to administer
the Plan pursuant to Section 1.3, and, to the extent the Board determines it
is appropriate for the compensation realized from Awards under the Plan to be
considered "performance based" compensation under Section 162(m) of the Code,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is an "outside director" within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m), and which, to the extent the Board determines it is
appropriate for Awards under the Plan to qualify for the exemption available
under Rule 16b-3(d)(1) or Rule 16b-3(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act,
shall be a committee or subcommittee of the Board composed of two or more
members, each of whom is a "non-employee director" within the meaning of Rule
16b-3. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Committee shall be the
Compensation Committee of the Board.

(l) " Common Stock " means common stock of GS Inc., par value $0.01 per
share.

(m) " Competitive Enterprise " means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity; (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in any entity that engages in any activity or
(iii) is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned by, or a significant
interest in which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, owned or controlled
by, any entity that engages in any activity that, in any case, competes or
will compete anywhere with any activity in which the Firm is engaged. The
activities covered by this definition include, without limitation: financial
services such as investment banking; public or private finance; lending;
financial advisory services; private investing for anyone other than the
Grantee and members of the Grantee's family (including for the avoidance of
doubt, any type of proprietary investing or trading); private wealth
management; private banking; consumer or commercial cash management; consumer,
digital or commercial banking; merchant banking; asset, portfolio or hedge
fund management; insurance or reinsurance underwriting or brokerage; property
management; or securities, futures, commodities, energy, derivatives, currency
or digital asset brokerage, sales, lending, custody, clearance, settlement or
trading.

(n) " Covered Person " means a member of the Board or the Committee or any
employee of the Firm.

(o) " Date of Grant " means the date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as the date of grant of the Award.

(p) " Dividend Equivalent Right " means a dividend equivalent right granted
under the Plan, which represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay to
the Grantee amounts equal to all or any portion of the regular cash dividends
that would be paid on shares of Common Stock covered by an Award if such
shares had been delivered pursuant to an Award.

(q) " Effective Date " means the date this Plan is approved by the
shareholders of GS Inc. pursuant to Section 3.15 hereof.

(r) " Employment " means the Grantee's performance of services for the Firm,
as determined by the Committee. The terms "employ" and "employed" shall have
their correlative meanings. The Committee in its sole discretion may determine
(i) whether and when a Grantee's leave of absence results in a termination of
Employment (for this purpose, unless the Committee determines otherwise, a
Grantee shall be treated as terminating Employment with the Firm upon the
occurrence of an Extended Absence), (ii) whether and when a change in a
Grantee's association with the Firm results in a termination of Employment and
(iii) the impact, if any, of any such leave of absence or change in
association on Awards theretofore made. Unless expressly provided otherwise,
any references in the Plan or any Award Agreement to a Grantee's Employment
being terminated shall include both voluntary and involuntary terminations.

(s) " Exchange Act " means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
from time to time, and the applicable rules and regulations thereunder.

(t) " Extended Absence " means the Grantee's inability to perform for six
(6) continuous months, due to illness, injury or pregnancy-related
complications, substantially all the essential duties of the Grantee's
occupation, as determined by the Committee.

(u) " Firm " means GS Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates.

(v) " Good Reason " means, in connection with a termination of employment by
a Grantee following a Change in Control, (a) as determined by the Committee, a
materially adverse alteration in the Grantee's position or in the nature or
status of the Grantee's responsibilities from those in effect immediately
prior to the Change in Control or (b) the Firm's requiring the Grantee's
principal place of Employment to be located more than seventy-five (75) miles
from the location where the Grantee is principally Employed at the time of the
Change in Control (except for required travel on the Firm's business to an
extent substantially consistent with the Grantee's customary business travel
obligations in the ordinary course of business prior to the Change in
Control).

(w) " Grantee " means a person who receives an Award.

(x) " GS Inc. " means The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and any successor
thereto.

(y) " 1999 SIP " means The Goldman Sachs 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as in
effect prior to the effective date of the 2003 SIP.

(z) " Outstanding " means any Award to the extent it has not been forfeited,
cancelled, terminated, exercised or with respect to which the shares of Common
Stock underlying the Award have not been previously delivered or other
payments made.

(aa) " Restricted Share " means a share of Common Stock delivered under the
Plan that is subject to Transfer Restrictions, forfeiture provisions and/or
other terms and conditions specified herein and in the Restricted Share Award
Agreement or other applicable Award Agreement. All references to Restricted
Shares include "Shares at Risk."

(bb) " Retirement " means termination of the Grantee's Employment (other
than for Cause) on or after the Date of Grant at a time when (i) (A) the sum
of the Grantee's age plus years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) equals or exceeds 60 and (B) the Grantee has
completed at least 10 years of service with the Firm (as determined by the
Committee in its sole discretion) or, if earlier, (ii) (A) the Grantee has
attained age 50 and (B) the Grantee has completed at least five years of
service with the Firm (as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion).

(cc) " RSU " means a restricted stock unit granted under the Plan, which
represents an unfunded and unsecured promise to deliver shares of Common Stock
in accordance with the terms of the RSU Award Agreement.

(dd) " Section  409A " means Section 409A of the Code, including any
amendments or successor provisions to that Section and any regulations and
other administrative guidance thereunder, in each case as they, from time to
time, may be amended or interpreted through further administrative guidance.

(ee) " SIP Administrator " means each person designated by the Committee as
a "SIP Administrator" with the authority to perform day-to-day administrative
functions for the Plan.

(ff) " SIP Committee " means the persons who have been delegated certain
authority under the Plan by the Committee.

(gg) " Solicit " means any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(hh) " Transfer Restrictions " means restrictions that prohibit the sale,
exchange, transfer, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, fractionalization,
hedge or other disposal (including through the use of any cash-settled
instrument), whether voluntarily or involuntarily by the Grantee, of an Award
or any shares of Common Stock, cash or other property delivered in respect of
an Award.

(ii) " Transferability Date " means the date Transfer Restrictions on a
Restricted Share will be released. Within 30 Business Days after the
applicable Transferability Date, GS Inc. shall take, or shall cause to be
taken, such steps as may be necessary to remove Transfer Restrictions.

(jj) " Vested " means, with respect to an Award, the portion of the Award
that is not subject to a condition that the Grantee remain actively employed
by the Firm in order for the Award to remain Outstanding. The fact that an
Award becomes Vested shall not mean or otherwise indicate that the Grantee has
an unconditional or nonforfeitable right to such Award, and such Award shall
remain subject to such terms, conditions and forfeiture provisions as may be
provided for in the Plan or in the Award Agreement.

(kk) " Vesting Date " means each date specified in the Grantee's Award
Agreement as a date on which part or all of an Award becomes Vested.

(ll) Window Period " means a period designated by the Firm during which all
employees of the Firm are permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock
( provided that, if the Grantee is a member of a designated group of
employees who are subject to different restrictions, the Window Period may be
a period designated by the Firm during which an employee of the Firm in such
designated group is permitted to purchase or sell shares of Common Stock).

EX-10.54 12 d192225dex1054.htm EX-10.54  EX-10.54

Exhibit 10.54

The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.

SIGNATURE CARD FOR  AWARDS

AND CONSENT TO RECEIVE ELECTRONIC DELIVERY

[IMPORTANT: PLEASE REVIEW, EXECUTE AND RETURN THIS FORM TO:

YOU MUST PROPERLY EXECUTE THIS FORM TO ACKNOWLEDGE ACCEPTANCE OF THE TERMS
AND CONDITIONS OF

YOUR AWARD(S) AND RELATED MATTERS.]

1. I have received and agree to be bound by The Goldman Sachs Amended and
Restated Stock Incentive Plan (2021) (the "SIP") and the Award Agreement(s)
applicable to me in connection with the 
Award(s) (the "Award(s)") that I have been granted by the Firm (as defined in
the SIP). I confirm that I am accepting the Award(s) subject to the terms and
conditions contained in the SIP, the Award Agreement(s), and this signature
card (the "Signature Card"), including, but not limited to, the requirement
that certain disputes be decided through arbitration in New York City and be
governed by New York law. For the avoidance of doubt, references to a "share"
or "Share" herein mean a share of the common stock of The Goldman Sachs Group,
Inc. ("GS Inc.") and, where applicable, deliveries of cash or other property
in lieu thereof.

For the avoidance of doubt, I understand and agree that to be eligible to
receive any award under the SIP or any predecessor plan, I must not have
engaged in any conduct constituting "Cause" (as defined in the SIP) prior to
the grant of the award, and by accepting this Award, I represent and warrant
that I have not engaged in any conduct constituting Cause.

As a condition of this grant, I understand that the Award(s) (as well as any
other award that the Firm may grant to me under the SIP) is/are subject to
governing law provisions as outlined in this Signature Card or in the
applicable Award Agreement(s), and, as a condition to receiving such awards, I
agree to be bound thereby. As a condition of this grant, I agree to provide
upon request an appropriate certification regarding my U.S. tax status on Form
W-8BEN, Form W-9, or other appropriate form, and I understand that failure to
supply a required form may result in the imposition of backup withholding on
certain payments I receive pursuant to this grant.

I irrevocably grant full power and authority to GS Inc. to register in its
name, or that of any designee, any and all Restricted Shares (as defined in
the applicable Award Agreement), Shares at Risk (as defined in the applicable
Award Agreement) or other shares of GS Inc. common stock that have been or may
be delivered to me subject to transfer restrictions or forfeiture provisions,
and I irrevocably authorize GS Inc., or its designee, to sell, assign or
transfer such shares to GS Inc. or such other persons as it may determine in
the event of a forfeiture of such shares pursuant to any agreement with GS
Inc.

Further, as a condition of this grant, if I am a person who has worked in the
United Kingdom at any time during the earnings period relating to any award
under the SIP, as determined by the Firm, when requested and as directed by
the Firm, I will agree to a Joint Election under s431 ITEPA 2003 of the laws
of the United Kingdom for full or partial disapplication of Chapter 2 Income
Tax (Earnings and Pension) Act 2003 under the laws of the United Kingdom and
will sign and return such election in respect of all future deliveries of
Shares underlying the Award(s) and any previous grants made to me under the
SIP and understand that the Firm intends to meet its delivery obligations in
Shares with respect to my Award(s), except as may be prohibited by law or
described in the accompanying Award Agreement(s) or supplementary materials.

If I have worked in Switzerland at any time during the earnings period
relating to the Award(s) granted to me as determined by the Firm, (i) I
acknowledge that my Award(s) are subject to tax in accordance with the rulings
and method of calculation of taxable values to be agreed by the Firm with the
Federal and/or Zurich/Geneva cantonal/communal tax authorities or as otherwise
directed by the Firm, and (ii) I hereby agree to be bound by any rulings
agreed by the Firm in respect of any Award(s), which is expected to result in
taxation at the time of delivery of Shares, and (iii) I undertake to declare
and make a full and accurate income tax declaration in respect of my Award(s)
in accordance with the above ruling or as directed by the Firm.

2. I have read and understand the Firm's "Notice Periods for Recipients of
Year-End Equity-Based Awards" policy, or any successor policy (the "Notice
Policy"), available on GSWeb > My HCM Policies link under the Policies tab >
Leaving the Firm link under Career and Performance or as otherwise provided
to me, pursuant to which I am required to provide certain specified advance
notice of my intent to leave employment with the Firm. I understand that the
Notice Policy will also apply with respect to my One-Time Awards (with the
references to "Year-End" deemed to be references to "One-Time" in this
context). By executing this form, I am agreeing to be bound by the Notice
Policy as in effect from time to time and, where applicable, am agreeing to a
permanent change in the terms and conditions of my employment. I agree to this
change in consideration of my continued employment with the Firm and the
Firm's offer of the Award(s). I understand that the Notice Policy requires me,
among other things, to provide my employing entity with advance written notice
of my intention to leave employment with the Firm as follows:

In the Americas: 60 days in advance of my termination date;  

In Europe, the Middle East, Africa and India: 90 days in advance of my
termination date; and  

In Japan and Asia Ex-Japan (including Australia and New Zealand and excluding
India): 90 days in advance of my termination date if I am a Vice President or
an Executive Director; 60 days in advance of my termination date in all other
cases.  

If, under local law or a written contract with the Firm (for example, a
Managing Director Agreement or Non-Competition Agreement), I have a notice
requirement that is longer than those specified above, I understand that the
longer notice period will apply. I also understand that if my employment is
subject to a probation period, the Notice Policy applies only if notice of
termination is given after the probation period has ended.

I understand that if I fail to comply in any respect with the Notice Policy, I
will have failed to meet an obligation I have under an agreement with the
Firm, as a result of which the Firm may have certain legal and equitable
rights and remedies, including, without limitation, forfeiture of the Award(s)
and any other awards granted to me under the SIP. The Firm may forfeit such
Award(s) for violation of the Notice Policy irrespective of whether this
agreement constitutes a legally recognized permanent change to my terms and
conditions of employment, and irrespective of whether applicable law permits
me to make a payment in lieu of notice. In addition, the Firm may seek an
order or injunction from a court or arbitration panel to stop a breach and may
also seek other permissible remedies. The Firm may hold me personally liable
for any damages it suffers as a result of the breach.

This agreement concerning my notice period is being made for and on behalf of
my Goldman Sachs employing entity, and implementation of the Notice Policy
does not create an employment relationship between me and GS Inc.

3. I have read and understand the Firm's hedging and pledging policies
(including, without limitation, the "Firmwide Policy with Respect to Personal
Transactions Involving GS Securities and GS Equity Awards"), and agree to be
bound by them (with respect to the Award(s) and any prior awards under the
SIP), both during and following my employment with the Firm.

4. As a condition to this grant, I agree to open and activate any brokerage,
trust, sub-trust, custody or similar account (an "Account"), as required or
approved by the Firm in its sole discretion. I agree to access, review,
execute and be bound by any agreements that govern any such Account, including
any provisions that provide for the applicable restrictions on transfers,
pledges and withdrawals of Shares, permitting the Firm to monitor any such
Account, and the limitations on the liability of the party (which may not be
affiliated with the Firm) providing the Account and the Firm. I understand and
agree that the Firm may direct the transfer of securities, cash or other
assets in my Account to the Firm in connection with any indebtedness or any
other obligation that I have to the Firm, as determined by the Firm in its
sole discretion, however such obligation may have arisen. I also agree to open
an Account with any other custodian, broker, trustee, transfer agent or
similar party selected by the Firm, if the Firm, in its sole discretion,
requires me to open an account with such custodian, broker, trustee, transfer
agent or similar party as a condition to delivery of Shares underlying the
Award(s).

5. If the Firm advanced or loaned me funds to pay certain taxes (including
income taxes and Social Security, or similar contributions) in connection with
the Award(s) (or does so in the future), and if I have not signed a separate
loan agreement governing repayment, I authorize the Firm to withhold from my
compensation any amounts required to reimburse it for any such advance or loan
to the extent permitted by applicable law.

I understand and agree that, if I leave the Firm, I am required immediately to
repay any outstanding amount. I further understand and agree that the Firm has
the right to offset, to the extent permitted by the Award Agreement and
applicable law (including Section 409A of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended, which limits the Firm's ability to offset in the case of
United States taxpayers under certain circumstances), any outstanding amounts
that I then owe the Firm against its delivery obligations under the Award(s),
against any obligations to remove restrictions and/or other terms and
conditions in respect of any Restricted Shares or Shares at Risk (each as
defined in the applicable Award Agreement) or against any other amounts the
Firm then owes me, including payments of dividends or dividend equivalent
payments. I understand that the delivery of Shares pursuant to the Award(s) is
conditioned on my satisfaction of any applicable taxes or Social Security
contributions (collectively referred to as "tax" or "taxes" for purposes of
the SIP and all related documents) in accordance with the SIP. To the extent
permitted by applicable law, the Firm, in its sole discretion, may require me
to provide amounts equal to all or a portion of any Federal, State, local,
foreign or other tax obligations imposed on me or the

Firm in connection with the grant, vesting or delivery of the Award(s) by
requiring me to choose between remitting such amount (i) in cash (or through
payroll deduction or otherwise), (ii) in the form of proceeds from the Firm's
executing a sale of Shares delivered to me pursuant to the Award(s) or (iii)
as otherwise permitted in the Award Agreement(s).  However, in no event
shall any such choice determine, or give me any discretion to affect, the
timing of the delivery of Shares or payment of tax obligations.

6. In connection with any Award Agreement or other interest I may receive in
the SIP or any Shares that I may receive in connection with the Award(s) or
any award I have previously received or may receive, or in connection with any
amendment or variation thereof or any documents listed in paragraph 7, I
hereby consent to (a) the acceptance by me of the Award(s) electronically, (b)
the giving of instructions in electronic form whether by me or the Firm, and
(c) the receipt in electronic form at my email address maintained at Goldman
Sachs or via Goldman Sachs' intranet site (or, if I am no longer employed by
the Firm, at such other email address as I may specify, or via such other
electronic means as the Firm and I may agree) all notices and information that
the Firm is required by law to send to me in connection therewith including,
without limitation, any document (or part thereof) constituting part of a
prospectus covering securities that have been registered under the U.S.
Securities Act of 1933, the information contained in any such document and any
information required to be delivered to me under Rule 428 of the U.S.
Securities Act of 1933, including, for example, the annual report to security
holders or the annual report on Form 10-K of GS Inc. for its latest fiscal
year, and that all prior elections that I may have made relating to the
delivery of any such document in physical form are hereby revoked and
superseded. I agree to check Goldman Sachs' intranet site (or, if I am no
longer employed by the Firm, such other electronic site as notified to me by
the Firm) periodically as I deem appropriate for any new notices or
information concerning the SIP. I understand that I am not required to consent
to the receipt of such documents in electronic form in order to receive the
Award(s) and that I may decline to receive such documents in electronic form
by contacting, which will provide me with
hard copies of such documents upon request. I also understand that this
consent is voluntary and may be revoked at any time on three business days'
written notice.

7. I hereby acknowledge that I have received in electronic form in accordance
with my consent in paragraph 6 the following documents:

The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated Stock Incentive Plan (2021);  

Summary of The Goldman Sachs Amended and Restated Stock Incentive Plan (2021);  

The annual report on Form 10-K for The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. for the
fiscal year ended ;  

The Award Agreement(s); and  

Summaries of the Award(s) ("Award Summary").  

8. I expressly authorize any appropriate representative of the Firm to make
any notifications, filings or remittances of funds that may be required in
connection with the SIP or otherwise on my behalf. Further, if I am an
employee who is resident in South Africa at a relevant time, by accepting my
Award(s), I expressly authorize any appropriate representative of the Firm to
make any required notification on my behalf to the Financial Surveillance
Department of the South African Reserve Bank (or its authorized dealer) in
relation to my participation in the SIP and to any acquisition of Shares for
no consideration under the SIP or other similar filing that may otherwise be
required in South Africa. I acknowledge that any such authorization is
effective from the date of acceptance of my Award(s) until such time as I
expressly revoke the authorization by written notice to any appropriate
representative of the Firm. I understand that this authorization does not
create any obligation on the Firm to deal with any such notifications, filings
or remittances of funds that I may be required to make in connection with the
SIP and I accept full responsibility in this regard.

9. The granting of the Award(s), the delivery of the underlying Shares 
and any subsequent dividends or dividend equivalent payments, and the receipt
of any proceeds in connection with the Award(s) may result in legal or
regulatory requirements in some jurisdictions. I understand and agree that it
is my responsibility to ensure that I comply with any legal or regulatory
requirements in respect of the Award(s).

10. I confirm that I have filed all tax returns that I am required to file
and paid all taxes I am required to pay with respect to awards previously
granted to me by the Firm, and I agree, with respect to both the Award(s) as
well as awards previously granted to me by the Firm, to file all tax returns I
am required to file in connection with the Award(s) and any sales of any
Shares or other property delivered pursuant to the Award(s) and to pay all
taxes I am required to pay.

11. The goodwill associated with the relationships between the Firm and its
clients and prospective clients is a valuable asset of the Firm that is built
and preserved through the combined services and efforts of the Firm and all of
its personnel. The Firm provides its employees with a unique platform of
financial products and services, confidential and proprietary information,
professional training, access to specialized expertise, research, analytical,
operational, and business development support, travel and entertainment
expenses and other valuable resources to build and enhance the goodwill
associated with the relationships between the Firm and its clients, as well as
to foster and establish such relationships with prospective clients.
Accordingly, I acknowledge and

agree that (i) because the Firm contributes valuable resources to build and
enhance client relationships, including those for which I provide services, it
has a legitimate and essential business interest in protecting the goodwill
associated with those relationships; (ii) by my continued employment, I
confirm that I have assigned and will assign to the Firm all goodwill I have
developed or will develop with persons or entities with whom I interact while
at the Firm and/or who are or will become clients or prospective clients of
the Firm in connection with my employment with the Firm, even if I did
business with such persons or entities prior to joining the Firm; and (iii)
while at the Firm I do not have and will not acquire any property,
proprietary, contractual or other legal right or interest whatsoever in or to
any client or prospective client with whom I interact or conduct business
while employed by the Firm or (except to the extent otherwise provided in a
written agreement between the Firm and me that governs my compensation) to any
current or prospective revenues associated with such client or prospective
client (all such interests being referred to herein as "Intangible
Interests"). For the avoidance of doubt, I am hereby assigning all Intangible
Interests to the Firm. I acknowledge and agree that my compensation during the
term of my employment with the Firm is adequate financial consideration in
this regard, and that no further consideration is necessary (including in
respect of obligations applicable to me after my employment with the Firm has
ended).

12. I understand and agree that the terms of any award granted to me under
the SIP or any predecessor plan that provide for accelerated vesting, delivery
or transferability as a result of Conflicted Employment (as defined in the
applicable Award Agreement) may be limited to the extent prohibited by
applicable law or regulation.

Data Collection, Processing and Transfers:

Grantees residing outside of the European Economic Area ("EEA") and PRC
(defined below): If I am located outside of the EEA and PRC, I consent to the
processing of my personal data in accordance with the information set out
below.

Grantees residing in the EEA or the UK: If I am located in the EEA or the
UK, my personal data will be processed in accordance with the information set
out below and in the GS HCM - Fair Processing Notice which can be found at
inconsistency, the GS HCM - Fair Processing Notice shall prevail over this
section. 

Grantees residing in the People's Republic of China ("PRC") (which, for the
purpose of this section, excludes Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
Macau Special Administrative Region and Taiwan): If I am located in the PRC, I
give my consent to the processing of my personal data as follows by signing
this signature card:

The Firm will process my personal data as set out in this section. I consent
to such use.  

The Firm will process and retain my sensitive personal data as set out in
this section and underlined. I consent to such use.  

The Firm will transfer my personal data to third parties within the PRC, as
described by this section and the hyperlinks within it. I consent to such
transfers.  

The Firm will transfer my personal data to third parties outside the PRC, as
described by this section and the hyperlinks within it. I consent to such
transfers.  

In connection with the SIP and any other Firm benefit plan (the "Programs"),
to the extent permitted under the laws of the applicable jurisdiction, the
Firm may process (including, where applicable, collecting,
transferring/transmitting internationally and/or domestically, disclosing,
using and storing) various data that is personal to me, and my data might be
deemed sensitive personal data in certain jurisdictions, including but not
limited to my name, address, work location, hire date, Social Security or
Social Insurance or taxpayer identification number (required for tax
purposes), type and amount of SIP or other benefit plan award , citizenship
or residency (required for tax purposes) and other similar information
reasonably necessary for the administration of such Programs (collectively
referred to as "Information") and provide such Information to its affiliates,
Computershare Limited and its affiliates (collectively "Computershare") and
Fidelity Stock Plan Services, LLC, Fidelity Personal Trust Company, FSB and
any of their affiliates (collectively "Fidelity") or any other service
provider, whether in the United States or elsewhere, as is reasonably
necessary for the administration of the Programs and under the laws of these
jurisdictions. In certain circumstances and subject to any applicable
restrictions regarding cross-border data transfers in the jurisdiction where
you reside, where required by law, foreign courts, law enforcement agencies or
regulatory agencies may be entitled to access the Information. Unless I 

explicitly authorize otherwise, the Firm, its affiliates and its service
providers (through their respective employees in charge of the relevant
electronic and manual processing) will process this Information only for
purposes of administering the Programs. In the United States and in other
countries to which such Information may be transferred for the administration
of the Programs, the level of data protection is not equivalent to data
protection standards in the member states of the EEA, Switzerland, Canada or
certain Canadian provinces or my home country and U.S. public authorities may
potentially access such Information. If I am employed in Argentina, the PRC,
Peru or Turkey, I have also read the text in bold in the respective Argentina,
the PRC, Peru and Turkey legal notices below (the "Argentina Clause", the "PRC
Clause", the "Peru Clause" or the "Turkey Clause") in conjunction with this
Data Collection, Processing and Transfers section, and I acknowledge that such
text forms part of this section and that in the event of any inconsistency the
Argentina Clause, PRC Clause, Peru Clause or Turkey Clause, as applicable,
shall prevail over this section. Upon request to Equity Compensation (division
of HCM), 200 West Street, 19 th Floor, New York, NY 10282, telephone (212)
357-1444, email EquityCompensation@ny.email.gs.com, to the extent required
under the laws of the applicable jurisdiction, I may have access to and obtain
communication of the Information and may exercise any of my rights in respect
of such Information, in each case free of charge, including objecting to any
type of processing of the Information and requesting that the Information be
updated or corrected (if wrong), completed or clarified (if incomplete or
equivocal), or erased (if it cannot legally be collected or kept). Upon
request, to the extent required under the laws of the applicable jurisdiction,
Equity Compensation (division of HCM) will also provide me, free of charge,
with a list of all the service providers used in connection with the Programs
at the time of request. There is no legal obligation for me to provide the
Firm with the Information and any Information is provided at my own will and
consent. If I refuse to authorize the processing of the Information consistent
with the above, I may not benefit from the Programs. The processing of the
Information will be consistent with the above for the period of administration
of the Programs. In particular (within the limits described above): (i) the
Firm will process data (Firm means GS Inc. and any of its subsidiaries and
affiliates); (ii) Fidelity or Computershare will process data; (iii) the
Firm's other service providers will process data; and (iv) data will be
transferred to the United States and other countries, as described above for
the purposes set forth herein. A list of the Firm's international offices and
countries to which data that is personal to me can be transferred is set forth
at http://www2.goldmansachs.com/who-we-are/locations/index.html. The
Information may be retained by the aforementioned persons beyond the period of
administration of the Programs to the extent permitted under the laws of the
applicable jurisdiction. 

Other Legal Notices:

By accepting (whether expressly or by implication) any benefit granted to me
by the Firm, including, without limitation, my Award(s), I acknowledge and
agree to each of the following:

No Public Offer: Awards under the SIP and the Firm's other compensation
and benefit programs are strictly limited to eligible participants and are not
intended to constitute a public offer in any jurisdiction, nor intended for
registration in any jurisdiction outside of the U.S. I must keep all Award-
related documents confidential and I may not reproduce, distribute or
otherwise make public any part of such documents without the Firm's express
written consent. If I have received any such documents and I am not the
intended recipient, I will disregard and destroy them.  

Transferability: Any provisions permitting transfers to a third party in
the Award documents will not apply to me (i) to the extent that the
applicability of those provisions would affect the availability of relevant
exemptions or tax favorable treatment, or (ii) otherwise in circumstances
determined by the Firm in its sole discretion from time to time.  

Adequate Information: I acknowledge that (i) I have been provided with
all relevant information and materials with respect to the Firm's operations
and financial conditions and the terms and conditions of my Award(s), (ii) I
have read and understood such information and materials, (iii) I am fully
aware and knowledgeable of the terms and conditions of my Award(s), and (iv) I
completely and voluntarily agree to the terms and conditions of my Award(s).  

Independent Advice Recommended: The information provided by the Firm or
its service providers in respect of an Award does not take into account the
individual circumstances of recipients and does not constitute investment
advice. Awards under the SIP involve certain risks and I should exercise
caution. The Firm recommends that I consult my own independent legal,
financial and tax advisors in all  

cases, and I acknowledge that I am provided with adequate opportunity to do
so.  

No Employer Involvement: Except to the extent required by applicable
law, all Awards are offered, issued and administered by GS Inc., a Delaware
corporation, and my employer (if it is not GS Inc.) is not involved in the
grant of my Award(s) or any other GS Inc. equity compensation. All documents
related to the Awards, including the SIP, the Award Agreement, this Signature
Card and the link by which I access these documents, are originated and
maintained in the United States.  

No Effect on Employment-Related Rights: Any compensation I receive (even
on a regular and repeated basis) in connection with the SIP is discretionary
and does not constitute part of my base or normal salary or wages. It does not
affect my rights and obligations under the terms of my employment and it will
not be taken into account (except to the extent otherwise required by
applicable law) in determining any other employment-related rights I may have,
including, without limitation, rights in relation to severance, redundancy or
end-of-service payments, bonuses, long-service awards, pension or retirement
benefits. In particular, I waive any and all rights to compensation or damages
in consequence of the termination of my employment for any reason whatsoever
insofar as those rights arise or may arise from me ceasing to have rights
under, or be entitled to receive payment in respect of, the SIP as a result of
such termination, or from the loss or diminution in value of such rights or
entitlements. This waiver applies whether or not such termination amounts to
wrongful or unfair dismissal.  

No Additional Entitlements: The grant of an Award is strictly
discretionary and voluntary and neither this Award (even if Award grants are
made to me on a regular and repeated basis) nor my employment contract implies
any expectation or right in relation to (i) the grant of any Award or similar
compensation in the future, (ii) the terms, conditions and amount of any Award
or similar compensation that the Firm may decide to grant in the future, or
(iii) continued employment in connection with any Award.  

Translations: The official Award documents (including contracts and
communications) are in the English language. I am responsible for ensuring
that I fully understand these documents. The English version of the documents
will always prevail in the event of any inconsistency with translated or
interpreted documents.  

Severability: If any provision (in whole or in part) of this Signature
Card or the other Award documents is to any extent illegal, otherwise invalid,
or incapable of being enforced, that provision will be excluded to the extent
(only) of such invalidity or unenforceability. All other provisions will
remain in full effect and, to the extent possible, the invalid or
unenforceable provision will be deemed replaced by a provision that is valid
and enforceable and that comes closest to expressing the intention of such
invalid or unenforceable provision.  

Country-Specific Legal Notices: I have read the country-specific legal
notices below that pertain to my place of employment and/or residence (and
also the location of my employer, if different), if any, and understand that
they apply throughout the term of my Award(s).  

[NON-COMPETITION AND NON-SOLICITATION RESTRICTIONS FOR EMPLOYEES PROVIDING
SERVICES IN ASIA 

In addition to and without limiting any provisions in the SIP or the
applicable Award Agreement(s) (including without limitation the Award vesting,
delivery, forfeiture, termination or repayment provisions) unless provided
otherwise in the Restrictions, if I am providing services to the Firm in Asia
or to BGH, in view of my importance to the Firm and/or BGH, I hereby agree to
and acknowledge the following:

(a) I hereby agree that the Firm or BGH would likely suffer significant harm
if I associate with a Covered Enterprise during my employment and for some
period of time after my employment ends. Accordingly, I hereby agree that I
will not, without the written consent of the Firm or BGH, during the
Restricted Period in the Geographic Area:

(i) form, or acquire a 5% or greater equity ownership, voting or profit
participation interest in, any Covered Enterprise; or

(ii) associate (including, but not limited to, association as an officer,
employee, partner, director, consultant, agent or advisor) with any Covered
Enterprise and in connection with such association engage in, or directly or
indirectly manage or supervise personnel engaged in, any activity:

A. which is similar or substantially related to any activity in which I was
engaged, in whole or in part, at the Firm or BGH,

B. for which I had direct or indirect managerial or supervisory responsibility
at the Firm or BGH, or

C. which calls for the application of the same or similar specialized
knowledge or skills as those utilized by me in my activities with the Firm or
BGH,

each such activity being determined with reference to the one-year period
immediately prior to the end of the Asia Service Period, and, in each such
case, irrespective of the purpose of the activity or whether the activity is
or was in furtherance of advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary business
of either the Firm or BGH or the Covered Enterprise.

(By way of example only, this provision precludes an "advisory" investment
banker from joining a leveraged-buyout firm, a research analyst from becoming
a proprietary trader or joining a hedge fund, or an information systems
professional from joining a management or other consulting firm and providing
information technology consulting services or advice to any Covered
Enterprise, in each case without the written consent of the Firm or BGH.)

(b) I hereby agree that during the Restricted Period, I will not, in any
manner, directly or indirectly, (1) Solicit a Client to transact business with
a Covered Enterprise or to reduce or refrain from doing any business with the
Firm or BGH, or (2) interfere with or damage (or attempt to interfere with or
damage) any relationship between the Firm or BGH and a Client.

(c) I hereby agree that during the Restricted Period, I will not, in any
manner, directly or indirectly:

(i) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to resign from the Firm or BGH;

(ii) Solicit any Selected Firm Personnel to apply for or accept employment (or
other association) with any person or entity other than the Firm; or

(iii) participate in the hiring of any Selected Firm Personnel (whether as an
employee, consultant or otherwise) by any person or entity other than the
Firm, including, without limitation, participating in the identification of
individuals for potential hire, and participating in any hiring decision.

I acknowledge and agree that I will be presumed to have violated this
provision if, during the Restricted Period, any Selected Firm Personnel are
Solicited or hired by any entity where I have, or will have, direct or
indirect managerial responsibility for such Selected Firm Personnel; provided,
however, that if I demonstrate to the Firm's reasonable satisfaction that I
was not involved in the solicitation or the hiring of the Selected Firm
Personnel, I will not be presumed to have violated this Section (c).

(d) I acknowledge and agree that these Restrictions form part of my terms and
conditions of employment. I also acknowledge and agree that these Restrictions
supersede any part of any other agreement (which, for the avoidance of doubt,
excludes the SIP and the Award Agreement(s)), written or oral, that I am
subject to in respect of the same subject matter unless I am notified in
writing to the contrary.

(e) Prior to accepting employment with any other person or entity during the
Restricted Period, I will provide any prospective employer with written notice
of the Restrictions with a copy containing the prospective employer's name and
contact information delivered simultaneously to the Firm.

(f) I understand that the Restrictions may limit my ability to earn a
livelihood in a business similar to the business of the Firm or BGH. I
acknowledge that a violation on my part of any of the Restrictions would cause
immeasurable and irreparable damage to the Firm or BGH. Accordingly, I agree
that the Firm and/or BGH will be entitled to injunctive relief in any court of
competent jurisdiction for any actual or threatened violation of any of the
Restrictions in addition to any other remedies it or they may have. In the
event that I violate any of the Restrictions, I acknowledge that the
Restricted Period shall automatically be extended by the period of time that I
was in violation of the said Restriction(s). I also acknowledge that a
violation of any of the Restrictions would constitute my failure to meet an
obligation I have under an agreement between me and the Firm that was entered
into in connection with my employment with the Firm and/or BGH, may be
detrimental to the Firm and/or BGH and would constitute "Cause" for purposes
of any equity-based awards granted to me by the Firm and/or BGH and will
result in my forfeiting such equity-based awards.

(g) If any provision (or part of a provision) of the Restrictions is held by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable
(whether in whole or in part), such provision will be deemed modified to the
extent, but only to the extent, of such invalidity, illegality or
unenforceability and the remaining such provisions will not be affected
thereby; provided, however, that if any of the Restrictions are held by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable
because it exceeds the maximum time period such court determines is acceptable
to permit such provision to be enforceable, such Restrictions will be deemed
to be modified to the minimum extent necessary to modify such time period in
order to make such provision enforceable hereunder.

(h) The promises contained in the Restrictions are provided by me for the
benefit of each Firm entity and BGH and I acknowledge and agree that each

such entity may independently enforce the Restrictions against me. Any benefit
that I give or am deemed to have given by virtue of the Restrictions is
received jointly and severally by each Firm entity (including, for the
avoidance of doubt, any Firm entity to which I provide services from time to
time) and BGH.

(i) For the purposes of the Restrictions, GS Inc. enters into the SIP and
Award Agreement(s) applicable to me in connection with the Award(s) in its own
capacity and as agent for each other Firm entity and BGH. The consideration
for the promises in these Restrictions is given to me by GS Inc. on its own
behalf and on behalf of each other Firm entity (including, for the avoidance
of doubt, any Firm entity to which I provide services from time to time) and
BGH.

(j) I acknowledge that the Restrictions set out in this clause are reasonable
and necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the Firm
and/or BGH, and that, having regard to those interests, such restrictions do
not impose an unreasonable burden on me.

(k) The Restrictions shall remain in full force and effect and survive the
termination of my employment for any reason whatsoever.

(l) If I am subject to the Non-Competition and Non-Solicitation Agreement for
Select Employees in the Equities Division, or a Managing Director subject to a
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. Managing Director Agreement, the Restrictions shall
not apply to me.

(m) If I am a Private Wealth Management employee subject to an Employee
Agreement Regarding Confidential and Proprietary Information and Materials and
Non-Solicitation, I will be subject to the restrictions contained in clause
(a) of the Restrictions but will not be subject to the restrictions contained
in clauses (b) and (c) of the Restrictions. Nothing in the Restrictions will
affect the operation of the Employee Agreement Regarding Confidential and
Proprietary Information and Materials and Non-Solicitation.

(n) For the purposes of the Restrictions only, the following terms have the
following meanings:

"Asia" means each state and territory in Australia, Brunei, Hong Kong
SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Labuan, Macau SAR, Malaysia, Mongolia,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the PRC, Singapore, Taiwan,
Thailand and Vietnam. 

"Asia Service Period" means the period during which I am located in Asia
and contracted to provide services to a member of the Firm in Asia or BGH. For
the avoidance of doubt, the Asia Service Period does not end when I transfer
to another member of the Firm in Asia or BGH.

"BGH" means Beijing Gao Hua Securities Company Limited, its subsidiaries
and affiliates, and its or their respective successors.

"  Client " means any client or prospective client of the Firm
or BGH (i) to whom I provided services at any time during the one year period
immediately prior to the end of the Asia Service Period, or (ii) for whom I
transacted business or solicited at any time during the one year period
immediately prior to the end of the Asia Service Period, or (iii) whose
identity became known to me in connection with my employment by the Firm or
BGH at any time during the one year period immediately prior to the end of the
Asia Service Period.

"Competitive Enterprise" means an existing or planned business
enterprise that (i) engages, or may reasonably be expected to engage, in any
activity, (ii) owns or controls, or may reasonably be expected to own or
control, a significant interest in or (iii) is, or may reasonably be expected
to be, owned by, or a significant interest in which is, or may reasonably
expected to be, owned or controlled by, any entity that engages in any
activity that, in any case, competes or will compete anywhere with any
activity in which the Firm or BGH is engaged. The activities covered by this
definition include, without limitation, financial services such as investment
banking, public or private finance, lending, financial advisory services,
private investing (for anyone other than me and members of my family),
merchant banking, asset or hedge fund management, insurance or reinsurance
underwriting or brokerage, property management, or securities, futures,
commodities, energy, derivatives or currency brokerage, sales, lending,
custody, clearance, settlement or trading.

"Covered Enterprise" means a Competitive Enterprise and any other
existing or planned business enterprise that: (i) offers, holds itself out as
offering or reasonably may be expected to offer products or services that are
the same as or similar to those offered by the Firm or BGH or that the Firm or
BGH reasonably expects to offer ("Firm Products or Services") or (ii) engages
in, holds itself out as engaging in or reasonably may be expected to engage in
any other activity that is the same as or similar to any financial activity
engaged in by the Firm or BGH or in which the Firm or BGH reasonably expects
to engage ("Firm Activities"). For the avoidance of doubt, Firm Activities
include any activity that requires the same or similar skills as any financial
activity engaged in by the Firm or BGH or in which the Firm or BGH reasonably
expects to engage, irrespective of whether any such financial activity is in
furtherance of an advisory, agency, proprietary or fiduciary undertaking.

The enterprises covered by this definition include enterprises that offer,
hold themselves out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engage in, hold themselves out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities directly, as well as
those that do so indirectly by ownership or control ( e.g. , by owning,
being owned by or by being under common ownership with an enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
Firm Products or Services or that engages in, holds itself out as engaging in
or reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities). The definition of
Covered Enterprise includes, solely by way of example, any enterprise that
offers, holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer
any product or service, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in any activity, in any case, associated
with investment banking; public or private finance; lending; financial
advisory services; private investing for anyone other than me or members of my
family (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any type of proprietary
investing or trading); private wealth management; private banking; consumer or
commercial cash management; consumer, digital, or commercial banking; merchant
banking; asset, portfolio or hedge fund management; insurance or reinsurance
underwriting or brokerage; property management; or securities, futures,
commodities, energy, derivatives, currency or digital asset brokerage, sales,
lending, custody, clearance, settlement or trading. An enterprise that offers,
holds itself out as offering or reasonably may be expected to offer Firm
Products or Services, or engages in, holds itself out as engaging in or
reasonably may be expected to engage in Firm Activities is a Covered
Enterprise , irrespective of whether the enterprise is a customer, client or
counterparty of the Firm or BGH or is otherwise associated with the Firm or
BGH and, because each of the Firm and BGH is a global enterprise, irrespective
of where the Covered Enterprise is physically located.

"Covered Extended Absence" means my absence from active employment for
at least 180 days in any 12-month period as a result of my incapacity due to
mental or physical illness, as determined by the Firm or BGH (as applicable).

"  Effective Date  " means (i) if the termination is for
cause or Covered Extended Absence, the date on which such termination occurs;
or (ii) if I repudiate my employment contract, the date of repudiation as
determined by the Firm or BGH (as applicable); or (iii) if I fail to return to
work on the agreed date from an unpaid leave of absence, the day after I was
due to return to work.

"Firm" means GS Inc., its subsidiaries and affiliates and its and their
respective successors.

"Geographic Area" means (i) the jurisdiction in Asia in which I am
located as of the date of execution of the Signature Card; and/or (ii) any
other jurisdiction in Asia in relation to which I have substantial product
and/or geographical market responsibilities in the one year period immediately
prior to the end of the Asia Service Period; and/or (iii) any other
jurisdiction in Asia in relation to which I have substantial employee
managerial responsibilities in the one year period immediately prior to the
end of the Asia Service Period; and/or (iv) any other jurisdiction in Asia in
relation to which I provided services in the one year period immediately prior
to the end of the Asia Service Period.

"PRC" means, for the purpose of the Restrictions, the People's Republic
of China, excluding Hong Kong SAR, Macau SAR and Taiwan.

"Restricted Period" means (i) in the event of the termination of my
employment with the Firm in Asia or BGH, the Asia Service Period including any
notice period applicable under the Notice Policy or, in the event I repudiate
my notice requirement or exercise any statutory right to shorten the notice
period or if my employment is terminated without notice or if the Firm elects
to shorten the notice period in whole or in part with or without pay in lieu
for any period of notice that has been waived or reduced, the Asia Service
Period and the period of time equivalent to my notice requirement commencing
from the Effective Date; or (ii) in the event of my employment with the Firm
in Asia or BGH ending by reason of the transfer of my employment to another
member of the Firm outside Asia, the Asia Service Period and the period of
time equivalent to my notice requirement commencing from the conclusion of the
Asia Service Period; or (iii) in the event of the termination of my secondment
to the Firm in Asia or BGH and assignment or transfer of my employment to
another member of the Firm outside Asia, the Asia Service Period and the
period of time equivalent to my notice requirement commencing from the
conclusion of the Asia Service Period.

"Restrictions" means the non-competition and non-solicitation
restrictions for employees providing services in Asia as set out in (a) to (o)
of this section of the Signature Card.

"Selected Firm Personnel" means any individual:

(i) who at any point in the 12 months preceding the conduct prohibited by (c)
of this section of the Signature Card was a Firm or BGH employee or
consultant; and

(ii) (a) with whom I have personally worked at any point during my employment
with the Firm; (b) who, on or at any time during the 12-month period
immediately prior to the end of the Asia Service Period, worked in the

same division(s) in which I worked; or (c) who holds or has ever held the
title of Advisory Director, Managing Director, or Senior Advisor of the Firm.

"Solicit" means making any direct or indirect communication of any kind
whatsoever, regardless of by whom initiated, inviting, advising, suggesting,
encouraging or requesting any person or entity, in any manner, to take or
refrain from taking any action. The terms "Solicited," "Soliciting" and
"Solicitation" will have their correlative meanings.

(o) Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Signature Card, the Restrictions shall
be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the jurisdiction
in which I am located and providing services to the Firm at the date of
execution of the Signature Card. If I am located and providing services to the
Firm in a state or territory in Australia, the laws of the jurisdiction shall
be New South Wales. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, any Firm entity (including,
for the avoidance of doubt, any Firm entity to which I provide services from
time to time) or BGH may at any time elect to enforce the Restrictions in any
competent court of any jurisdiction determined by such entity.]

FOR EMPLOYEES IN CERTAIN EUROPEAN UNION JURISDICTIONS (BELGIUM, DENMARK,
FRANCE, GERMANY, IRELAND, LUXEMBOURG AND SWEDEN)

You are being offered Award(s) under the SIP in order to provide an additional
incentive and to encourage employee share ownership and to increase your
interest in GS Inc.'s success. The Award(s) are offered to you by GS Inc. in
accordance with the terms of the SIP which are summarized in the Award
Summary. Further details on the rights attaching to your Award(s) can be found
in the Award Summary. More information about GS Inc. is available at
www.gs.com.

The shares subject to the Award(s) are new or existing ordinary shares in GS
Inc. and information on the total maximum number of shares which can be
offered under the SIP rules can be found in the section entitled Shares
Available for Awards in the SIP. The obligation to publish a prospectus does
not apply because of Article 1(4)(i) of the EU Prospectus Regulation

If applicable, you should also refer to any additional specific notices below
in relation to these jurisdictions.

FOR ARGENTINA EMPLOYEES ONLY

Your Award(s) are being offered to you in your capacity as an employee of the
Firm and not aimed at the general public. By receiving and accepting your
Award(s), you are deemed to (i) acknowledge that the Firm has not made, and
will not make, any application to obtain an authorization from the National
Securities Commission ( Comisión Nacional de Valores) for the public
offering of the underlying Shares in Argentina, or otherwise taken any action
that would permit a public offering of the underlying Shares in Argentina
within the meaning of Argentine Capital Markets Law No. 26,831, as amended,
supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time (the "CML") and of the
Argentine Securities Exchange Commission General Resolution No. 622/2013, as
amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, and ancillary
regulations; (ii) acknowledge that the Argentine Securities Exchange
Commission has not approved the offering of the underlying Shares nor any
document relating to its offering; and (iii) agree that you will not sell or
offer to sell any Shares acquired upon settlement of your Award(s) in
Argentina other than pursuant to transactions that would not qualify as a
public offering under Section 2 of the CML.

The Award documents are being delivered to you in your capacity as an employee
of the Firm. Accordingly, receipt and acceptance of the Award documents
constitute your agreement that the information contained in the Award
documents may not be (i) reproduced or used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose whatsoever other than as a representation of your holding of Shares,
or (ii) furnished to or discussed with any person (other than your personal
advisors on a confidential basis) without the express written permission of GS
Inc.

You acknowledge that the Access to Public Information Agency, as the enforcing
authority of Act 25.326, has the power to attend the reports and claims from
those who are affected in their rights consequence of non-fulfilment of data
protection provisions. (La Agencia de Acceso a la Información Pública, en su
carácter de Órgano de Control de la Ley Nº 25.326, tiene la atribución de
atender las denuncias y reclamos que interpongan quienes resulten afectados en
sus derechos por incumplimiento de las normas vigentes en materia de
protección de datos personales.)

Additional data protection information for Argentina employees (which should
be read in conjunction with, and forms part of, the Data Collection,
Processing and Transfers section above):

You understand that your data may be stored in a database duly registered
with the Argentine National Data Protection Agency, under the name and
responsibility of GS Inc. or one of its subsidiaries or affiliates.

FOR AUSTRALIA EMPLOYEES ONLY

GS Inc. undertakes that it will, within a reasonable period of you so
requesting and at no charge, provide you with a copy of the rules of the SIP.
The market price of a Share can be accessed at the following link:
price can be ascertained by applying the prevailing USD/AUD exchange rate
published by the Reserve Bank of Australia, which can be accessed at the
following link: http://www.rba.gov.au/statistics/frequency/exchange-
rates.html.

Any advice given by GS Inc. in connection with the SIP is general advice only.
The documentation does not take into account the objectives, financial
situation or needs of any particular person. Before acting on the information
contained in the documentation, or making a decision to participate, you
should consider obtaining your own financial product advice from a person who
is licensed by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) to
give such advice.

Throughout the period in which you hold a dividend equivalent right you may
obtain copies of all information filed by GS Inc. with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) which is accessible by GS Inc.'s shareholders and
the general public ("shareholder information") by going to the SEC's website (
aware that shareholder information can affect the value of your dividend
equivalent rights from time to time.

The actual value you receive in respect of the Shares acquired by you will
depend on the number of Shares you receive, the market value of a Share, the
value of any dividend and dividend equivalent payments made in respect of a
Share, and the USD/AUD exchange rate.

There are risks associated with an investment in Shares and the value of any
Shares you receive may be less than the value of those Shares today. Some of
those risks are specific to GS Inc.'s business activities while others are of
a more general nature. For more detail on those risks, please refer to GS
Inc.'s most recent annual report. Individually or in combination, those risks
may affect the value of Shares.

Fidelity Personal Trust Company, FSB ("Trustee") will hold Shares that are the
subject of Award(s). Subject to the terms and conditions of the Award(s), any
Shares, and income gained, held on your behalf may only be dealt with by the
Trustee with your direction. You may direct the Trustee on the exercise of any
applicable voting rights that you hold in respect of such Shares. GS Inc.
undertakes that it will, within a reasonable period of you so requesting and
at no charge, provide you with a copy of the trust deed.

FOR BRAZIL EMPLOYEES ONLY

The Award(s) referred to in this document and the underlying Shares have not
been and will not be publicly issued, placed, distributed, offered or
negotiated in the Brazilian capital markets and, as a result, will not be
registered with the Brazilian Securities Commission ( Comissão de Valores
Mobiliários ). The Award(s) and the underlying Shares will not be offered or
sold in Brazil under any circumstances that constitute a public offering,
placement, distribution or negotiation under the Brazilian capital markets
regulation.

By accepting the Award(s), you agree and acknowledge that (i) neither your
employer nor any person or entity acting on behalf of your employer has
provided you with financial advice with respect to your Award(s) or the Shares
acquired upon settlement of your Award(s); and (ii) your employer does not
guarantee a specified level of return on your Award(s) or the registered
Shares.

According to Brazilian regulations, individuals resident in Brazil must inform
the Central Bank of Brazil yearly the amounts of any nature, the assets and
rights (including cash and other deposits) held outside of the Brazilian
territory. Please consult your own legal counsel on the terms and conditions
for presentation of such information.

By accepting the Award(s), you acknowledge that the Firm has provided you with
Portuguese translations of the Award Summary, Award Agreement and Signature
Card, but that the original English versions of these documents control. (Ao
aceitar esta outorga, Você reconhece que a Empresa Ihe disponibilizou a versão
em português do Award Summary, do Award Agreement e do Signature Card; porém a
versão original em inglês desses documentos prevalecerá.)

FOR CHILE EMPLOYEES ONLY

By accepting the Signature Card connected to your Award, you acknowledge that
this legend applies to all Award-related documents and communications.

General Warning

Neither GS Inc., the SIP nor the Shares have been registered in the Registro
de Valores (Securities Registry) or in the Registro de Valores Extranjeros
(Foreign Securities Registry) of the Comisión para el Mercado Financiero
(Chilean Commission for the Financial Market or CMF) and they are not subject
to the control of the CMF. If such securities are offered within Chile, they
will be offered and sold only pursuant to Norma de Carácter General 336
(General Regulation 336) of the CMF, an exemption to the registration
requirements, or in circumstances which do not constitute a public offer of
securities in Chile within the meaning of Article 4 of the Chilean Securities
Market Law 18,045. As the Shares are not registered, the issuer has no
obligation under Chilean law to deliver public information regarding the
Shares in Chile. The Shares shall not be subject to public offering in Chile
unless they are registered in the Foreign Securities Registry of the CMF. The
commencement date of the offer is the date on which these documents were first
provided to you via email.

Statement by Investors (Grantees)

Pursuant to General Regulation 336 (as amended), you are required to inform GS
Inc. whether or not you are a "Qualified Investor" as defined in Norma de
Carácter General 216 (General Regulation 216) of the CMF. By accepting the
Signature Card connected to your Award, you state to GS Inc. that you are not
a Qualified Investor, or if you are a Qualified Investor, that you have
provided a separate statement acknowledging this to GS Inc. (please note that
any such statement may be emailed to GS Inc. at
EquityCompensation@ny.email.gs.com). By accepting the Signature Card connected
to your Award, you further state to GS Inc. that you acknowledge:

(i) that the securities acquired in connection with the SIP will not be
registered in the CMF Securities Registry or Foreign Securities Registry and,
therefore, such securities may not be publicly offered in Chile; and

(ii) that since GS Inc. is not registered in the registries kept by the CMF,
GS Inc. will not be subject to the CMF's oversight nor to the ongoing
disclosure obligations imposed by the law and regulation on registered
issuers.

English Language

You declare that you read and understand English and that the fact that the
official SIP documents are in the English language does not represent any
inconvenience or prejudice to you. If you do not understand their content,
please contact your HCM contact in order to obtain a Spanish version.

Accessibility of Award Documents

The Firm undertakes to provide you with a copy of the key documents pertaining
to your Award in a form that remains accessible even if your employment is
terminated.

SÓLO PARA EMPLEADOS DE CHILE

Al aceptar la "Signature Card" relacionada con su plan, usted reconoce que
esta leyenda se aplica a todos los documentos y comunicaciones relacionados
con el SIP.

Advertencia General

Ni GS Inc., ni el SIP, ni las Acciones, han sido registradas en el Registro
de Valores o Registro de Valores Extranjeros que lleva la Comisión para el
Mercado Financiero ("CMF") y ninguno de ellos está sujeto a la fiscalización
de la CMF. Si dichos valores son ofrecidos dentro de Chile, serán ofrecidos y
colocados sólo de acuerdo a la Norma de Carácter General 336 de la CMF, una
excepción a la obligación de registro, o en circunstancias que no constituyan
una oferta pública de valores en Chile según lo definido por el Artículo 4 de
la Ley 18.045 de Mercado de Valores de Chile. Por tratarse de valores no
inscritos, el emisor de las Acciones no tiene obligación bajo la ley chilena
de entregar en Chile información pública acerca de las Acciones. Las Acciones
no pueden ser ofrecidas públicamente en Chile en tanto éstas no se registren
en el Registro de Valores Extranjeros de la CMF. Se informa que la fecha de
inicio de la presente oferta será aquella en que estos documentos fueron
entregados a usted por primera vez vía email.

Declaración de los Inversionistas (Destinatarios)

De conformidad con la Norma de Carácter General N°336 (modificada), se
requiere que usted informe a GS Inc. si califica como "Inversionista
Calificado" en los términos de la Norma de Carácter General N°216 de la CMF.
Por medio de la aceptación de la Signature Card referida a su Plan, usted
declara a GS Inc, que no califica como "Inversionista Calificado", o que si
califica como "Inversionista Calificado", usted ha enviado por separado una
declaración reconociendo dicha circunstancia a GS Inc. (favor tenga en cuenta
que cualquier declaración puede ser enviada a GS Inc., al correo
EquityCompensation@ny.email.gs.com). Por medio de la aceptación de la
Signature Card referida a su plan, usted declara a GS Inc, que está en
conocimiento de que:

(i) los valores adquiridos en conexión con el SIP no estarán inscritos en el
Registro de Valores o en el Registro de Valores Extranjeros de la CMF y, por
lo tanto, dichos valores no podrán ser públicamente ofrecidos en Chile; y

(ii) dado que GS Inc. no está inscrita en los registros mantenidos por la
CMF, GS Inc. no estará sujeta a la fiscalización de la CMF ni a las
obligaciones de información continua impuestas por la ley y la regulación a
los emisores inscritos.

Idioma Inglés

Usted declara que lee y entiende el idioma inglés, de manera que el hecho de
que los documentos oficiales del SIP se encuentren en idioma inglés no
representa ningún inconveniente o perjuicio para usted. En caso de que usted
no entienda el contenido de estos documentos, por favor comuníquese con su
encargado de recursos humanos, a fin de obtener una versión en español.

Accesibilidad a los Documentos del Plan

La empresa se obliga a entregarle una copia de los documentos clave relativos
al plan de forma tal que permanezcan accesibles a usted incluso luego de
terminada su relación laboral con ésta.

FOR THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA EMPLOYEES ONLY

All documentation in relation to the Award(s) is intended for your personal
use and in your capacity as an employee of the Firm (and/or its affiliate) and
is being given to you solely for the purpose of providing you with information
concerning the Award(s) which the Firm may grant to you as an employee of the
Firm (and/or its affiliate) in accordance with the terms of the SIP, this
documentation and the applicable Award Agreement(s). The grant of the Award(s)
has not been and will not be registered with the China Securities Regulatory
Commission of the People's Republic of China pursuant to relevant securities
laws and regulations, and the Award(s) may not be offered or sold within the
mainland of the People's Republic of China by means of any of the
documentation in relation to the Award(s) through a public offering or in
circumstances which require a registration or approval of the China Securities
Regulatory Commission of the People's Republic of China in accordance with the
relevant securities laws and regulations.

You agree that notwithstanding anything to the contrary under the SIP or the
Award Agreement(s), the Award(s) may be settled in cash in Renminbi or such
other currency, payable by your employing entity in the mainland of the
People's Republic of China or such other entity, in each case, as may be
determined by the Firm in its sole discretion.

Additional data protection information for the People's Republic of China
employees (which should be read in conjunction with, and forms part of, the
Data Collection, Processing and Transfers section above):

You have the ability to request the name, contact information, processing
purpose and processing methods for any onshore data controller to which the
Firm discloses your personal data in connection with your Award. You also have
the ability to request the information listed in the preceding sentence, as
well as information on the procedures that you may follow to exercise your
data rights, in relation to any foreign party to which the Firm discloses your
personal data in connection with your Award. The Firm will respond to any such
request by you as soon as is reasonably practicable for the Firm.

FOR FRANCE EMPLOYEES ONLY

By accepting the Award(s), you acknowledge that the Firm has provided you with
French translations of the Award Summary, Award Agreement and Signature Card,
but that the original English versions of these documents control.

The provisions of the Award Agreement will apply only in respect of the year
to which the Award Agreement relates and will not in any circumstances create
any right or entitlement to you for any future fiscal years.

En acceptant cet octroi, vous reconnaissez que la Société vous a transmis une
version française de l'Award Summary (Résumé de l'Octroi), l'Award Agreement
(Contrat d'Octroi) et de la Signature Card (Carte de Signature), mais que
seule la version originale en langue anglaise fait foi.

Les dispositions de l'Accord de prime s'appliquent uniquement à l'année
concernée par l'Accord de prime et ne créent en aucune circonstance tous
droits ou habilitations s'agissant des années fiscales à venir.

FOR HONG KONG EMPLOYEES ONLY

WARNING:

The contents of this document have not been reviewed by any regulatory
authority in Hong Kong. You are advised to exercise caution in relation to
this Award(s). If you are in doubt about any of the contents of this document,
you should obtain independent professional advice.

This document has not been, and will not be, registered as a "prospectus" in
Hong Kong under the Companies (Winding Up and Miscellaneous Provisions)
Ordinance (Cap 32) nor has it been authorised by the Securities and Futures
Commission in Hong Kong pursuant to the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap
571) of the Laws of Hong Kong. This document does not constitute an offer or
invitation to the public in Hong Kong to acquire any securities nor an
advertisement of securities in Hong Kong. This document is distributed on a
confidential basis.

By accepting the Award(s), you acknowledge and agree that you will not be
permitted to transfer awards to persons who fall outside the definition of
'qualifying persons' in the Companies (Winding Up and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Ordinance (Cap 32) (i.e., a person who is not a current or former
director, employee, officer, consultant of the Firm or a person other than the
offeree's wife, husband, widow, widower, child or step-child under the age of
18 years, or as otherwise defined), even if otherwise permitted under the SIP
or any of the related documents.

FOR INDIA EMPLOYEES ONLY

The Award documents (including any related website) do not invite offers from
the public for subscription or purchase of the securities of any body
corporate under any law for the time being in force in India. The documents
are not a prospectus under the applicable laws for the time being in force in
India. GS Inc. does not intend to market, promote, invite offers for
subscription or purchase of the securities of any body corporate by these
documents. The information provided in the documents is for the record only.
Any person who subscribes or purchases securities of any body corporate should
consult their own investment advisors before making any investments. GS Inc.
shall not be liable or responsible for any such investment decision made by
any person.

FOR INDONESIA EMPLOYEES ONLY

By accepting the Award(s), you acknowledge that the Firm has provided you with
Bahasa Indonesia translations of the Award Summary, Award Agreement and
Signature Card, but that the original English versions of these documents
control. Dengan menerima Putusan, Anda menyatakan bahwa Perusahaan telah
memberikan Anda terjemahan Bahasa Indonesia dari Ikhtisar Putusan, Perjanjian
Putusan dan Perjanjian dengan Tanda Tangan, tapi versi asli dalam Bahasa
Inggris dari dokumen-dokumen ini tetap mengendalikan.

FOR ITALY EMPLOYEES ONLY

The current Award(s) are offered to fewer than 150 natural persons in Italy
and therefore the obligation to produce a prospectus in connection with the
Award(s) does not apply because of Article 1(4)(b) of the EU Prospectus
Regulation 2017/1129.

No person resident or located in Italy other than the original recipient of
this document and any other document related to the Award(s) may rely on such
documents or their content. The offer of the Award(s) under the SIP (and the
delivery of the underlying Shares) is exempted from prospectus requirements
under Italian securities legislation.

Under Italian rules, Italian taxpayers generally must report in their annual
tax return the value of any financial instruments held abroad at year-end
(such as financial and real estate assets). Please consult your own advisors
regarding the terms and conditions of this reporting obligation.

FOR NEW ZEALAND EMPLOYEES ONLY

GS Inc. is offering you an Award(s) under the SIP in reliance upon clause 8 of
Schedule 1 of the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 (offers under employee
share purchase schemes) ( Exclusion ). In accordance with the requirements
of the Exclusion, the following information has been made available to you:

GS Inc.'s most recent annual report via https://www.goldmansachs.com/investor-
relations/index.html.  

The SIP documentation (which constitutes the current rules of the employee
share purchase scheme for the purposes of the Exclusion) on

A copy of the Award Agreement on https://hcm.web.gs.com/newaward.  

GS Inc.'s most recent published audited and unaudited financial statements on

A copy of the auditor's report on the above financial statements (if any) at

You may obtain a copy of the documents listed above by electronic means from
the internet site addresses given in each case. You may request hard copies of

the documents listed above free of charge from Head of Securities Compliance -
Goldman Sachs Australia Pty Ltd.

For further information, including the form, dividend payments, vesting,
delivery, and transfer restrictions of the Awards, please refer to the
documents listed above.

Warning

The Award(s) is an offer of Shares (although the Award may in limited
circumstances be settled in cash or other property). The Shares give you a
stake in the ownership of GS Inc. You may receive a return if dividends are
paid.

If GS Inc. runs into financial difficulties and is wound up, you will be paid
only after all creditors and holders of any preference shares have been paid.
You may lose some or all of your investment.

New Zealand law normally requires people who offer financial products to give
information to investors before they invest. This information is designed to
help investors to make an informed decision.

The usual rules do not apply to this offer because it is made under an
employee share purchase scheme. As a result, you may not be given all the
information usually required. You will also have fewer other legal protections
for this investment.

Ask questions, read all documents carefully, and seek independent financial
advice before committing yourself.

The Shares are quoted on a stock exchange. GS Inc. intends to quote these
Shares on the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ). This means you may be able
to sell them on the NYSE if there are interested buyers. You may get less than
you invested. The price will depend on the demand for the Shares.

FOR PERU EMPLOYEES ONLY

If you are employed in Peru, the following statement is hereby made part of
the SIP documents: the Shares which may be issued upon settlement of your
Award have not been registered with the Public Registry of the Securities
Market administered by the Peruvian Securities Market Superintendence (
Superintendencia del Mercado de Valores - SMV) and may not be offered or
sold publicly in Peru. In addition, the contents of the SIP documents have not
been reviewed by any Peruvian regulatory authority. 

Additional data protection information for Peru employees (which should be
read in conjunction with, and forms part of, the Data Collection, Processing
and Transfers section above):

GS Inc., identified by Tax ID Number (EIN) No. 134019460, with registered
office at 200 West Street, New York 10282 - United States, will use, collect,
transfer and store your following personal data for the purpose of accessing
the SIP: name, address, work location, hire date, Social Security or Social
Insurance or taxpayer identification number (required for tax purposes), type
and amount of SIP Awards or other benefit plan award, citizenship or residency
(required for tax purposes). Your personal data is necessary for the execution
of the SIP, therefore if you express your refusal to provide it, GS Inc. will
not be able to execute the SIP. Your personal data will be stored in a data
bank owned by GS Inc., the identity of which can be obtained upon your
request, for the time necessary to complete the SIP and/or until the
fulfillment of legal obligations provided by the applicable regulations are
applicable to GS Inc. Your personal data could be sent to GS Inc. affiliates,
detailed in http://www2.goldmansachs.com/who-we-are/locations/index.html ;
including, Computershare Limited and its affiliates and Fidelity Stock Plan
Services, LLC, Fidelity Personal Trust Company, FSB and any of their
affiliates; or any other service provider necessary for the administration of
the SIP, which will be communicated to you by GS Inc. You may exercise your
rights of access, rectification and cancellation through
EquityCompensation@ny.email.gs.com. 

FOR RUSSIA EMPLOYEES ONLY

None of the information contained in this Signature Card or the documents that
you received in electronic form (as listed in this Signature Card) constitutes
an advertisement of the Award(s) in Russia and must not be passed on to third
parties or otherwise be made publicly available in Russia. The Award(s) have
not been and will not be registered in Russia and are not intended for
"placement" or "public circulation" in Russia.

You understand and agree that the Firm may, in its sole discretion or where
required by legal or regulatory requirements, grant Awards as cash-settled
instruments or settle Awards in cash and that you will not have any rights to
the Shares underlying your Award(s) (if any). Your Award(s) will remain
subject to the terms and conditions contained in the SIP, the Award
Agreement(s), and this Signature Card.

FOR SAUDI ARABIA EMPLOYEES ONLY

The Award(s) are offered to you on behalf of Goldman Sachs Saudi Arabia,
Commercial Registration Number 1010256672, 25th Floor, Kingdom Tower, Post
Office Box 52969, Riyadh 11573, Saudi Arabia. The SIP documents may not be
distributed in the Kingdom except to such persons as are permitted under the
Rules on the Offer of Securities and Continuing Obligations issued by the
Capital Market Authority. The Capital Market Authority does not make any
representation as to the accuracy or completeness of the SIP documents, and
expressly disclaims any liability whatsoever for any loss arising from, or
incurred in reliance upon, any part of the SIP documents. Prospective
purchasers of the securities offered hereby should conduct their own due
diligence on the accuracy of the information relating to the securities. If
you do not understand the contents of the SIP documents you should consult an
authorized financial adviser.

FOR SINGAPORE EMPLOYEES ONLY

The Award(s) are prescribed capital markets products (as defined in the
Securities and Futures (Capital Markets Products) Regulations 2018) and
Excluded Investment Products (as defined in MAS Notice SFA 04-N12: Notice on
the Sale of Investment Products and MAS Notice FAA-N16: Notice on
Recommendations on Investment Products).

The Shares or the Award(s) may not be offered or sold, or be made the subject
of an invitation for subscription or purchase, whether directly or indirectly,
to persons in Singapore other than pursuant to, and in accordance with the
conditions of, an exemption under any provision of Subdivision (4) of Division
1 of Part XIII of the Securities and Futures Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore.

FOR SPAIN EMPLOYEES ONLY

Please note that the offer of an Award under the SIP does not constitute a
public offer in Spain, and therefore it is not subject to registration with
the Spanish authorities. The Award(s) are offered to you by GS Inc. in
accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the SIP and the Award
Agreement(s). The grantees may be subject to certain reporting obligations for
the acquisition or disposal of Shares under the SIP, the opening of cash or
brokerage bank accounts abroad and the transfer or receipt of funds. Please
consult your own advisors regarding these and other legal or tax obligations
that may be applicable.

FOR TURKEY EMPLOYEES ONLY

This offer is not a public offering in terms of the Turkish Capital Markets
legislation and the information provided herein cannot be construed as a
public offering. The grant of the Award(s) should not be construed as a public
offering or a private placement and is made to you as an employee of the Firm.
You are not obligated to accept your Award(s). Your decision to accept or
reject the Award(s) is entirely up to you and will have no impact on your
employment or your career, either positive or negative. The grant of your
Award(s) does not change or supplement the terms of your employment in any
way. The Award documents do not constitute an employee handbook or an
employment contract between you and the Firm.

The information set forth in the Award documents is solely for informative
reasons and the Firm is not hereby giving you nor purports to be giving you
investment or other financial advice. The Firm reserves the right to suspend,
change, amend or supplement the terms of the Award documents, in whole or in
part, for any reason at any time. If you are in doubt about the merits of the
Award documents, you should contact your financial advisor.

Additional data protection information for Turkey employees (which should be
read in conjunction with, and forms part of, the Data Collection, Processing
and Transfers section above):

In terms of the Law on the Protection of Personal Data No. 6698 and its
relevant legislation, GOLDMAN SACHS TK DANIŞMANLIK HİZMETLERİ ANONİM ŞİRKETİ
acts as the data controller regarding your personal data in Turkey.

FOR UK EMPLOYEES ONLY

This document does not have regard to the specific investment objectives,
financial situation and particular needs of any specific person who may
receive it. Recipients should seek their own financial advice.

The Award(s) are subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the SIP and
the Award Agreement(s). The price of Shares and the income from such Shares
(if any) can fluctuate and may be affected by changes in the exchange rate for
U.S. dollars. Past performance will not necessarily be repeated. Levels and
bases of taxation may change from time to time. Investors should consult their
own tax advisors in order to understand tax consequences. GS Inc. has (and its
associates may have) a material interest in the Shares and the investments
that are the subject of this document.

You are being offered Award(s) under the SIP in order to provide an additional
incentive and to encourage employee share ownership and to increase your
interest in GS Inc.'s success. The Award(s) are offered to you by GS Inc. in
accordance with the terms of the SIP which are summarized in the Award
Summary. Further details on the rights attaching to your Award(s) can be found
in the Award Summary. More information about GS Inc. is available at
www.gs.com.

The shares subject to the Award(s) are new or existing ordinary shares in GS
Inc. and information on the total maximum number of shares which can be
offered under the SIP rules can be found in the section entitled Shares
Available for Awards in the SIP. The obligation to publish a prospectus does
not apply because of Section 86(aa) of the Financial Services and Markets Act
2000 (as amended, supplemented or substituted by any UK legislation enacted in
connection with the UK's exit from the European Union).

EX-21.1 13 d192225dex211.htm EX-21.1  EX-21.1

Exhibit 21.1

Significant Subsidiaries of the Registrant

The following are significant subsidiaries of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. as
of December 31, 2021 and the states or jurisdictions in which they are
organized. Each subsidiary is indented beneath its principal parent. The
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. owns, directly or indirectly, at least 99% of the
voting securities of substantially all of the subsidiaries included below. The
names of particular subsidiaries have been omitted because, considered in the
aggregate as a single subsidiary, they would not constitute, as of the end of
the year covered by this report, a "significant subsidiary" as that term is
defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X under the Securities Exchange Act of

Name    State or Jurisdiction of

Organization of Entity  

The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC

New York  

Goldman Sachs Funding LLC

Delaware  

GS European Funding S.A R.L.

Luxembourg  

MTGLQ Investors, L.P.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs (UK) L.L.C.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs UK Funding Limited

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs Group UK Limited

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs International Bank

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs International

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs Group Holdings (U.K.) Limited

United Kingdom  

ELQ Investors VIII Ltd

United Kingdom  

J. Aron & Company LLC

New York  

GSAM Holdings LLC

Delaware  

GSAMI Holdings I Ltd

United Kingdom  

GSAMI Holdings II Ltd

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs Asset Management International Holdings Ltd

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs Asset Management International

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs Asset Management, L.P.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs Asset Management International Holdings L.L.C.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs Asset Management Co., Ltd.

Japan  

Goldman Sachs (Asia) Corporate Holdings L.L.C.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs Holdings (Asia Pacific) Limited

Hong Kong  

Goldman Sachs (Japan) Ltd.

British Virgin Islands  

Goldman Sachs Japan Co., Ltd.

Japan  

Goldman Sachs Holdings (Hong Kong) Limited

Hong Kong  

Goldman Sachs Holdings (Singapore) Pte. Ltd.

Singapore  

J. Aron & Company (Singapore) Pte.

Singapore  

Goldman Sachs Holdings ANZ Pty Limited

Australia  

Goldman Sachs Financial Markets Pty Ltd

Australia  

Goldman Sachs Australia Pty Ltd

Australia  

GS Lending Partners Holdings LLC

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs Bank USA

New York  

Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE

Germany  

Goldman Sachs Mortgage Company

New York  

Name    State or Jurisdiction of

Organization of Entity  

GS Financial Services II, LLC

Delaware  

GS Funding Europe VI Ltd

United Kingdom  

GS Funding Europe I Ltd.

Cayman Islands  

GS Funding Europe V Limited

United Kingdom  

GSSG Holdings LLC

Delaware  

Special Situations Investing Group II, LLC

Delaware  

Special Situations Investing Group III, Inc.

Delaware  

GS Asian Venture (Delaware) L.L.C.

Delaware  

Asia Investing Holdings Pte. Ltd.

Singapore  

Mercer Investments (Singapore) Pte. Ltd.

Singapore  

Goldman Sachs Asia Strategic Pte. Ltd.

Singapore  

ALQ Holdings (Del) LLC

Delaware  

GLQ International Partners LP

United Kingdom  

GLQ Broad Street Holdings Ltd.

Cayman Islands  

Broad Street Brazil Ltd

Jersey  

Broad Street Credit Investments Europe S.A R.L.

Luxembourg  

BSCH III Designated Activity Company

Ireland  

GLQ International Holdings Ltd

Jersey  

GLQ Holdings (UK) Ltd

United Kingdom  

ELQ Investors VI Ltd

United Kingdom  

ELQ Investors II Ltd

United Kingdom  

ELQ Lux Holding S.A R.L.

Luxembourg  

GLQL S.A R.L.

Luxembourg  

GLQC II Designated Activity Company

Ireland  

Goldman Sachs Asia Strategic II Pte. Ltd.

Singapore  

Broad Street Equity Investments Europe Ltd

United Kingdom  

Goldman Sachs Specialty Lending Group, L.P.

Delaware  

Broad Street Principal Investments Superholdco LLC

Delaware  

Broad Street Principal Investments, L.L.C.

Delaware  

Broad Street Credit Holdings LLC

Delaware  

GS Fund Holdings, L.L.C.

Delaware  

Broad Street Principal Credit Strategies, L.P.

Delaware  

Goldman Sachs PSI Global Holdings, LLC

DelawareEX-23.1 14 d192225dex231.htm EX-23.1  EX-23.1

Exhibit 23.1

CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM

We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration
Statements on Form S-3 (File No. 333-253421), on Form S-4 (No. 333-260413) and
on Form S-8 (File Nos. 333-80839, 333-42068, 333-106430, 333-120802,
333-235973 and 333-261673) of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. of our report
dated February 24, 2022 relating to the financial statements and the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in
Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.

/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

New York, New York

February 24, 2022EX-31.1 15 d192225dex311.htm EX-31.1  EX-31.1

Exhibit 31.1

CERTIFICATIONS

I, David Solomon, certify that:

I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2021 of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.;  

Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;  

Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;  

The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over
financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f))
for the registrant and have:  

a) 

Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure
controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated
subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;  

b) 

Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such
internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;  

c) 

Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and
procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the
period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and  

d) 

Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual
report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and  

The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on
our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to
the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of
directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):  

a) 

All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process,
summarize and report financial information; and  

b) 

Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.  

Date: February 24, 2022

/s/

David Solomon

David Solomon

Title:

Chief Executive Officer

CERTIFICATIONS

I, Denis P. Coleman III, certify that:

I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2021 of The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.;  

Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;  

Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;  

The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over
financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f))
for the registrant and have:  

a) 

Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure
controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated
subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;  

b) 

Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such
internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;  

c) 

Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and
procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the
period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and  

d) 

Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual
report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and  

The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on
our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to
the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of
directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):  

a) 

All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process,
summarize and report financial information; and  

b) 

Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.  

Date: February 24, 2022

/s/

Denis P. Coleman III

Denis P. Coleman III

Title:

Chief Financial OfficerEX-32.1 16 d192225dex321.htm EX-32.1  EX-32.1

Exhibit 32.1

CERTIFICATION

Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, the undersigned officer of The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. (the Company) hereby certifies that the Company's Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 (the Report) fully complies
with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d), as applicable, of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and that the information contained in the
Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and
results of operations of the Company.

Dated: February 24, 2022

/s/

David Solomon

David Solomon

Title:

Chief Executive Officer

The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §
1350 and is not being filed as part of the Report or as a separate disclosure
document.

CERTIFICATION

Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, the undersigned officer of The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc. (the Company) hereby certifies that the Company's Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 (the Report) fully complies
with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d), as applicable, of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and that the information contained in the
Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and
results of operations of the Company.

Dated: February 24, 2022

/s/

Denis P. Coleman III

Denis P. Coleman III

Title:

Chief Financial Officer

The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §
1350 and is not being filed as part of the Report or as a separate disclosure
document.

